arXiv:2404.01462vl1 [cs.LG] 1 Apr 2024

OpenChemlE: An Information Extraction Toolkit

For Chemistry Literature

Vincent Fan,*t8 Yujie Qian,*t8 Alex Wang, Amber Wang,’ Connor W.

Coley, and Regina Barzilay*"4

{Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139
{Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, 02139
q Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139

§ Equal Contribution
E-mail: yujieq@csail.mit.edu; regina@csail.mit.edu

Abstract

Information extraction from chemistry literature is vital for constructing up-to-date

reaction databases for data-driven chemistry. Complete extraction requires combining

b.

nformation across text, tables, and figures, whereas prior work has mainly investigated
extracting reactions from single modalities. In this paper, we present OpenChemlE to
address this complex challenge and enable the extraction of reaction data at the doc-

ument level. OpenChemlE approaches the problem in two steps: extracting relevant

b.

nformation from individual modalities and then integrating the results to obtain a

final list of reactions. For the first step, we employ specialized neural models that each

address a specific task for chemistry information extraction, such as parsing molecules
or reactions from text or figures. We then integrate the information from these mod-
ules using chemistry-informed algorithms, allowing for the extraction of fine-grained
reaction data from reaction condition and substrate scope investigations. Our machine
learning models attain state-of-the-art performance when evaluated individually, and
we meticulously annotate a challenging dataset of reaction schemes with R-groups to
evaluate our pipeline as a whole, achieving an F1 score of 69.5%. Additionally, the
reaction extraction results of OpenChemlE attain an accuracy score of 64.3% when
directly compared against the Reaxys chemical database. We provide OpenChemlE

freely to the public as an open-source package, as well as through a web interface.

Introduction

Reaction data curated from scientific literature is commonly used to train models for chem-
informatics. Today, this data is collected and maintained by experts in databases such as
Reaxys./ However, this manual extraction comes with prohibitive cost and delayed updates.
Moreover, increasingly nuanced machine learning models for reaction development require
more fine-grained and comprehensive data, pertaining to reaction conditions, substrate scope,
and other screening processes in synthetic chemistry 2 Existing automated techniques can
only partially address this task, focusing on specific subproblems, such as reaction parsing
from individual diagrams or text passages In this paper, we present OpenChemlE, a
system that extracts reaction data from chemical literature at the document level.

This extraction task is difficult because large swathes of reaction data are realized in
multiple modalities, often requiring chemical reasoning to fully determine relevant molecular
structures. Figure{l]illustrates two challenges. First, the molecular structures are not entirely
depicted in the figure, as they contain R-groups. The abbreviated structures can be identified
by directly parsing phenol for R? in entry 1 of the accompanying table, or by comparing the
differences in the molecular graphs of 1 and 1u in entry 21. Second, the system must

align additional reaction metadata with the correct structures. In Figure [1] the highlighted
