2502.10240v1 [physics.optics] 14 Feb 2025

arXiv

Strong field physics in open quantum systems

Neda Boroumand,! Adam Thorpe,! Graeme Bart,! Andrew Parks,?, Mohamad
Toutounji,? Giulio Vampa,* Thomas Brabec,!* and Lu Wang ({£3#))7
‘Department of Physics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada
2? Wyant College of Optical Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, 85721, USA
3 College of Science, Department of Chemistry, UAE University, Al-Ain, UAE

* Joint Attosecond Science Laboratory, National Research Council of Canada and University of Ottawa,
100 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Ontario K1A OR6, Canada

Dephasing is the loss of phase coherence due to the interaction of an electron with the environment.
The most common approach to model dephasing in light-matter interaction is the relaxation time
approximation. Surprisingly, its use in intense laser physics results in a pronounced failure, because
ionization is highly overestimated. Here, this shortcoming is corrected by developing a strong field
model in which the many-body environment is represented by a heat bath. Our model reveals
that ionization enhancement and suppression by several orders of magnitude are still possible, how-
ever only in more extreme parameter regimes. Our approach allows the integration of many-body
physics into intense laser dynamics with minimal computational and mathematical complexity, thus
facilitating the identification of novel effects in strong-field physics and attosecond science.

Introduction

Strong laser-matter interaction is commonly modeled as
a closed quantum system with a single active electron
[1, 2]. While this assumption is well justified for atomic
gases, its validity is not so clear for denser materials, such
as liquids and solids. A full many-body treatment of the
non-perturbative dynamics of all electrons and nuclei is
prohibitively difficult. Therefore, it is more practical to
model dense materials as a single active electron within
an open quantum system, where many-body effects are
accounted for by interactions with the environment [3, 4].
Due to its simplicity, the environment in intense laser-
driven solids is mostly modeled in the relaxation time
approximation [5, 6], where the effect of many-body dy-
namics is replaced by a dephasing time T> [7-9]. Dephas-
ing represents the destruction of the coherence between
different one-electron eigenstates of the material, as a re-
sult of many-body collisions.

However, a simple calculation for an under-resonantly
driven two-level system reveals questionable features of
he relaxation time approximation [10]. Throughout this
per, we refer to ionization as the laser-induced excita-
ion of an electron from the valence |0) to the conduction
1) band, as determined by conventional optical field ion-
ization theory [11]. In Fig. la the ionization dynamics
with dephasing described via the relaxation time approx-
imation (yellow) and without dephasing (blue) are com-
ared. It can be seen that the relaxation time approxi-
mation predicts nine orders of magnitude ionization en-
hancement at very moderate electric field strength. This
is clearly unphysical according to experimental measure-
ments. Though this overestimation of ionization may
e mitigated by introducing a time-dependent relaxation
ime [12, 13], the underlying issue is still not resolved. We
erm the ionization enhancement caused by dephasing as
dephasing ionization.

Two Level System Overestimated lonization

lo>

\a Time

lonization

Two Band System External Heat Bath

i> |
So TEE Ee ?

b Temperature

Energy

FIG. 1. Illustration of under-resonantly driven, open two-
level/band systems. Panel a presents the two-level sys-
tem (band gap E, = 3.51 eV) described by the relaxation
time approximation. On the right-hand side ionization with
(T2 = 8fs, yellow curve) and without dephasing (Tz = 0,
lue curve) is compared. A moderate electric field strength
Eo = 5x 10°V/m with photon energy ~ 0.39 eV (Ao = 3.2m)
is chosen. See Supplement Fig.S3 for details. Panel b shows
the two-band system coupled to a heat bath described via
the spin-boson model. The heat bath is modeled using boson
harmonic oscillator modes. As the temperature rises, boson
modes with higher energies are engaged (gray curves).

In short, dephasing ionization happens when the phase
relation between the laser and the two-level system is
disturbed. Therefore, the laser-driven virtual population
of the excited state is transformed into real excitation
ice. dephasing ionization. Here, the virtual excitation
refers to the population that disappears after the laser
pulse. The apparent shortcomings of the relaxation time
approximation leave a gap between more complex and

computationally demanding many-body approaches and
oversimplified dephasing models commonly used in in-
tense light-matter interaction.

Furthermore, ionization is the first step in all strong
field processes, such as material machining [14-16], peta-
hertz electronics [17, 18], electron acceleration from nano
emitters [19], and attosecond spectroscopy in atoms,
molecules and solids [2, 20]. Due to the importance o:
ionization, a deeper understanding of dephasing ioniza-
tion is essential.

As such, a more sophisticated model is needed tha
ideally maintains most of the simplicity and wide appli-
cability of the relaxation time approximation. We borrow
inspiration from the field of open quantum systems and
adopt one of its key achievements, the spin-boson model,
which typically serves as a minimal model to describe the
quantum dynamics of an electron under the influence o
the environment [21-23]. Here, the spin-boson model is
integrated into the semiconductor Bloch equations gov-
erning intense laser solid-state physics. The electron dy-
namics is represented by a single electron-hole, two-band
model which is linearly coupled to its environment via
bosonic harmonic oscillator modes, see Fig. 1b. The so-
called strong field spin-boson (SFSB) model allows for a
closed-form solution of the electron dynamics in an en-
vironment and in the presence of an intense laser. We
refer to the environment as a heat bath in the rest of the
paper.

The SFSB fixes the pathological ionization behavior
displayed by the relaxation time approximation. Never-
theless, numerical analysis of the SFSB equation reveals
that ionization enhancement of up to a few orders of mag-
nitude is still possible, but only at high temperatures.
Interestingly, in the opposite low-temperature limit the
heat bath can suppress ionization by up to a few orders of
magnitude, which we term as dephasing suppressed ion-
ization. This occurs when the electron and heat bath
interact strongly.

The SFSB model provides a distinctive approach to
uncovering the physics of complex many-body systems
with minimal computational and mathematical complex-
ity. The predictive power of the SFSB approach can be
progressively refined through either more detailed models
or by fine-tuning the heat bath response through com-
parison with experiments. We anticipate that the SFSB
framework will facilitate the discovery of new phenomena
in strong-field physics and attosecond science.

Theory

Our analysis starts with a single electron two-band sys-
tem coupled to a bosonic heat bath via a linear interac-

tion term, [24, 25]

1 1
H = —5E(Ki,t)o. + 5K, toe + SO hgh! bg
qd

+02. 94 (by +03) . (1)

q

Here, E(t) is the laser electric field, the vector poten-
tial is defined by —0,A = E, and K, = K + eA(t)/h.
The canonical momentum K belongs to the shifted Bril-
louin zone BZ. Further, Q(K:,t) = (2e/h)d(K;, t)E(¢)
is a generalized Rabi frequency, e > 0 is the elemen-
tary charge and fh is the Planck constant; d(A;,t) and
€(K,,t) represent transition dipole and bandgap between
conduction |1) and valence |0) band, respectively. The
time dependence of these quantities arises from the mov-
ing momentum frame. The Pauli matrices are denoted
by o; (j = #,y,2). Finally, wg, bt by, and gy are the
harmonic oscillator frequency, creation, and annihilation
operators, and the coupling coefficient of a mode with
momentum q, respectively.

The coupling term between the heat bath and the two-
band system appears exclusively in the diagonal terms of
the Hamiltonian. Thus, it accounts only for dephasing,
and not directly for heat-bath driven transitions between
bands, i.e the off-diagonal terms. Nevertheless, due to the
coupling of laser and heat bath driven dynamics [5, 26],
dephasing does influence the overall ionization. In the
high-temperature limit, multi-boson transitions between
valence and conduction band could become relevant but
are ignored here.

The Hamiltonian shown in Eq.(1) can be further sim-
plified. First, we perform a polaron transformation that
diagonalizes the laser-free Hamiltonian [27]. This is fol-
lowed by a change to the interaction picture, which re-
sults in

_ E(Ki,t)

Ay = 2

ot Shi Kt) (o.D" + oD) .
(2)

For a detailed derivation, see Supplementary Mate-
rial, Section I. Here, o, = (02 +ioy)/2ando_ =
(oz — toy) /2. The interactions with laser and heat bath
are now described by a single term, with the shift opera-
tor defined as D = exp {- 49a [bi (t) — b,(¢)] / (ey).

The evolution of the density matrix is determined by
the integration of the Liouville-Von Neumann equation
with the Hamiltonian shown in Eq.(2). Initially, the
valence band is fully occupied, the conduction band is
empty, and the heat bath is in thermal equilibrium. A
closed-form solution is obtained by using a Dyson expan-
sion up to the second order. As we are only interested
in the two-band system dynamics, the heat bath degrees
of freedom are traced out (see Supplementary Material
Sections II-III for details) [8, 24, 25, 28-35]. We found
