Dynamics and Rheology of Polymer Melts via Hierarchical
Atomistic, Coarse-grained, and Slip-spring Simulations

1
2
0
2

n
a
J

2
2

]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
5
8
9
8
0
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Alireza F. Behbahani

†,@

, Ludwig Schneider

‡,@

†
, Anastassia Rissanou

Baˇcov´a

†

‡
, Pritam Kumar Jana

, Wei Li

, Manolis Doxastakis

¶

, Anthony Chazirakis
§

, Petra
(cid:107)

, Patrycja Poli´nska

, Craig Burkhart

,

†

Marcus M¨uller

, and Vagelis A. Harmandaris

∗,⊥,†,#

¶
∗,‡

† Institute of Applied and Computational Mathematics, Foundation for Research and Technology - Hellas,
Heraklion GR-71110, Greece
‡ Institute for Theoretical Physics, Georg-August University G¨ottingen, Germany
¶ Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee
37996, USA
§ Goodyear S.A., Avenue Gordon Smith, Colmar-Berg L-7750, Luxembourg
(cid:107) The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, 142 Goodyear Blvd., Akron, Ohio 44305, USA
⊥ Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University of Crete, Heraklion GR-71110, Greece
# Computation-based Science and Technology Research Center, The Cyprus Institute, Nicosia 2121, Cyprus

@ A. F. Behbahani and L. Schneider contributed equally to this work
∗ E-mail: mmueller@theorie.physik.uni-goettingen.de, harman@uoc.gr

Abstract

A hierarchical (triple scale) simulation methodology is presented for the prediction of the dynamical
and rheological properties of high molecular weight entangled polymer melts. The methodology consists
of atomistic, moderately coarse-grained (mCG), and highly coarse-grained slip-spring (SLSP) simulations.
At the mCG level, a few chemically bonded atoms are lumped into one coarse-grained bead. At this
level, the chemical identity of the underlying atomistic system, and the interchain topological constraints
(entanglements) are preserved. The mCG interaction potentials are derived by matching local structural
distributions of the mCG model to those of the atomistic model through iterative Boltzmann inversion.
For matching mCG and atomistic dynamics, the mCG time is scaled by a time scaling factor, which
compensates for the lower monomeric friction coeﬃcient of the mCG model than that of the atomistic
one. At the SLSP level, multiple Kuhn segments of a polymer chain are represented by one coarse-grained
bead. The very soft nonbonded interactions between beads do not prevent chain crossing and, hence,
can not capture entanglements. The topological constraints are represented by slip-springs, restricting
the lateral motion of polymer chains. A compensating pair potential is used in the SLSP model, to
keep the static macromolecular properties unaltered upon the introduction of slip-springs. The static
and kinetic parameters of the SLSP model are determined based on the lower level simulation models.
Particularly, matching the orientational autocorrelation of the end-to-end vector, we determine the
number of slip-springs and calibrate the timescale of the SLSP model. As the test case, the hierarchical
methodology is applied to cis-1,4-polybutadiene (cPB) at 413 K. Dynamical single-chain and linear
viscoelastic properties of cPB melts are calculated for a broad range of molecular weights, ranging from
unentangled to well-entangled chains. The calculations are compared, and found in good agreement, with
experimental data from the literature.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, with the progress of available computational power, molecular simulations have become a powerful
and predictive tool for the investigation of the chain dynamics and the rheology of polymer materials. However,
molecular simulations of polymer materials of industrial relevance are not straightforward because of the
extremely broad range of time and length scales involved in macromolecular chains of high molecular weights.
As an example, relevant timescales of a polymer melt extend from the periods of covalent bond vibrations

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
(≈ 10−14 s) to times of entangled chain relaxation that might be of the order of seconds, even at temperatures
well above the glass transition temperature, Tg. Moreover, relevant length scales of a polymer material cover
atomic sizes (10−10 m) up to the size of a polymer chain (≈ 10−8–10−7 m) and possibly larger length scales
that characterize the structure of hybrid multiphase systems. Therefore, a single modeling approach cannot
simultaneously address all relevant length and time scales, and it is necessary to combine simulation methods
of diﬀerent spatiotemporal scales. 1–4

The natural route for increasing the length and time scales accessible to simulations is to use a coarse-
grained (CG) representation of polymer chain. 1–3,5 A CG model is commonly obtained by lumping a group of
chemically bonded atoms into one superatom (CG bead or particle) and tuning the CG model to reproduce
some target structural, dynamical, and/or thermodynamic properties of the ﬁne-grained, more detailed,
model. A systematic parametrization of CG models includes deriving interaction potentials between CG beads
and/or calibration of the CG model parameters using data from the more detailed atomistic simulations;
such a procedure is typically called ”bottom-up coarse-graining”.

An alternative to the systematic bottom-up derivation of coarse-grained representations are top-down
CG models. 6 In these approaches, a universal representation (e. g., a bead-spring model) is adopted that
only incorporates the relevant interactions, such as the connectivity along the macromolecular backbone
and the segmental repulsion, limiting ﬂuctuations of the melt density – in a computationally eﬃcient way.
The strengths of these relevant interactions are related to experimentally measurable quantities, such as the
spatial extent of the macromolecules in a melt and the isothermal compressibility. Comparing to experimental
data or lower-scale simulations, the strength of the interactions or time and length scales are identiﬁed for a
speciﬁc material. Universal models are also widely used for studying (in a qualitative manner) the general
behavior of polymer materials. 7

Because of the averaging over microscopic details, CG potentials are softer than the corresponding
ﬁne-grained potentials. However, at low or moderate degrees of coarse-graining (lumping a few atoms in a
CG bead) the interactions remain strong enough to prevent chain crossing and to preserve entanglement
constraints between polymer chains. So far, various moderately coarse-grained models, which stay close
to the microscopic structure, have been proposed in the literature for diﬀerent polymers through diﬀerent
coarse-graining procedures. Typical examples include the works by Tsch¨op et al. 1,8 who introduced a
systematic coarse-graining procedure and applied it to derive CG potentials for polycarbonates. They
generated long atomistic chains, with a proper distribution of torsional angles, through Monte-Carlo (MC)
simulations and mapped them onto a CG representation by replacing groups of atoms with CG beads. The
eﬀective bonded potentials (bond length, angle, torsion) of the CG chain were calculated from the Boltzmann
inverse of the corresponding distributions. Finally, the nonbonded interactions between CG beads were
adjusted to reproduce the correct density of the polymer. Reith et al. 9 introduced an iterative procedure,
called iterative Boltzmann inversion, for deriving eﬀective CG potentials. They also determined nonbonded
CG interactions by matching radial distribution function (RDF) of the CG melt to that of the atomistic
melt. Harmandaris and collaborators 4,10,11 devised CG models for polystyrene (PS) chains and studied
the structural and dynamical properties of PS melts. Ohkuma and Kremer 12 studied the properties of two
diﬀerent CG models (with and without pressure correction) for cis-1,4-polyisoprene. Kempfer et al. 13 used
a trajectory-matching approach for coarse-graining of cis-1,4-polybutadiene (cPB). In their approach, the
parameters of the CG model were obtained by optimizing the matching between the trajectory of the CG
model, produced through DPD simulation, and the reference trajectory of the more detailed model. Recently,
Shahidi et al. 14 used an inverse Monte Carlo method for constructing local-density dependent CG potentials
for cis-1,4-polyisoprene; in addition to the conventional bonded and pair distributions, the derived CG
potentials reproduce the distribution of the nearest-neighbors of the underlying atomistic model. Moderately
CG models have also been used to study interfacial polymer systems, like polyamide/graphene, 15 PS/gold, 16
and polyisoprene/graphite 17 systems.

At high degrees of coarse-graining (lumping many atoms in one CG bead), which are necessary for the
simulation of high molecular weight polymers, pair interactions are very soft and they can not prevent chain
crossing, and hence, the model fails to capture the topological constraints (entanglements) between polymer
chains. 3,5,6,18 Therefore, to preserve entanglement eﬀects, which are key features of polymer dynamics,
additional constraints should be added to the model. 3,5,18,19 To reintroduce the reptation dynamics into
highly CG models, single-chain and multi-chain slip-link 20–27 and slip-spring (SLSP) 18,28–35 models have
been developed.

2

Single chain models restrict the motion of monomers by springs. One end of a spring can slide 24 along the
polymer contour or hop from one segment to a neighboring one along the chain contour. 25 The other end of the
spring is anchored to a background. These constraints mimic entanglement eﬀects, including constraint release
and contour-length ﬂuctuations. The anchoring to a background, however, requires additional assumptions to
describe deformation or ﬂow. 26

In multi-chain SLSP models, the topological constraints are represented by additional springs between
beads. Reptation is achieved similarly by sliding the springs on both ends along the backbone of the chains.
Since the constraints are not anchored to the background the models are translationally invariant. Multi-chain
SLSP models are particularly useful since they can describe complex systems with spatial heterogeneities. 18
So far, some attempts have been made to parameterize slip-link and SLSP models for speciﬁc polymer
systems. Sukumaran and Likhtman 5 compared a single-chain SLSP model to the dynamics of the Kremer-Grest
bead-spring polymer model. Theodorou et al. 36–39 developed an equation-of-state-based multi-chain SLSP
model, in which the nonbonded interactions are derived from an equation of state (e. g., Sanchez–Lacombe
equation of state). They used either experimental data or atomistic simulations to parameterize the SLSP
model for cis-1,4-polyisoprene as well as bulk and interfacial polyethylene systems. Becerra et al. 40 used
atomistic simulations to parameterize a single-chain slip-link model for poly(ethylene oxide). Recently Wu et
al. 41 applied hybrid particle-ﬁeld atomistic molecular dynamics simulations to a united atom model of PE; in
these simulations, the ﬁeld treatment of the nonbonded interactions make them eﬀectively soft. Entangled
dynamics was recovered by the introduction of SLSPs.

It is clear from the above discussion that the dynamics of polymer melts have been extensively studied
via diﬀerent simulation methods. However, there are still many challenges related, in particular, to the
quantitative prediction of the single-chain dynamics and rheology of well-entangled polymers of given chemistry,
and their direct study over a very broad range of spatiotemporal scales. To achieve this, a systematic linking
of simulation methodologies across diﬀerent scales is required.

To address the above challenges here we propose a hierarchical (triple scale), mainly bottom-up, simulation
methodology that involves atomistic, moderately coarse-grained (mCG), and highly coarse-grained SLSP
simulations to predict the dynamical and rheological properties of polymers, over timescales ranging from a
few fs up to ms and molecular weights up to the well-entangled regime. As a reference system, we choose
cPB, which is a well-known elastomer with important industrial applications. At the atomistic level, cPB
is described through a united atom model. In the mCG model, each monomer of cPB (containing four
united atoms) is mapped into one bead. This model is close to the chemical structure of PB and still
allows a signiﬁcant simulation speedup, relative to the atomistic model. In this work, we parameterize a
SLSP model, which represents a 400-mer chain of cPB by just 32 interaction centers, using our moderately
coarse-grained (mCG) model. The parameter passing provides a consistent description of static properties, the
single-chain dynamics, and the collective kinetics on time and length scales, where the highly coarse-grained
model applies. For this speciﬁc system, we demonstrate that the SLSP model can quantitatively predict
rheological properties for high molecular weight systems.

The computational requirements of each coarse-grained level are orders of magnitudes smaller than the

next ﬁner description level. All the diﬀerent levels of description of cPB are shown in Figure 1.

2 Atomistic model

At the ﬁnest level, cPB is described using a united atom model. Each PB monomer has four united atom
groups: two CH2 groups (for end monomers: one CH2 and one CH3) and two CH groups that form a double
bond (see Figure 1a). A validated force ﬁeld 42–44 proposed by Smith and Paul was chosen for the description
of the atomistic interactions. However, to preserve stereochemistry during long runs, the torsional potential
of carbon double bonds in this force ﬁeld was modiﬁed. 44 The MD runs were performed in the NPT ensemble
at T = 413 K and P = 1 atm. Temperature and pressure were controlled using Nos´e-Hoover thermostat 45,46
and Parrinello-Rahman barostat. 47 Nonbonded interactions were cut oﬀ at 1 nm and van der Waals tail
corrections were applied to energy and pressure. The Leap-frog scheme with 1 fs time step was used for the
integration of equations of motion. We used the open-source package GROMACS 48 to perform the atomistic
and mCG simulations.

3

Figure 1: Diﬀerent levels of description of cPB. (a) At the ﬁnest level, PB is described through a united atom
model. (b) At the moderately CG level, each monomer of PB is mapped onto one bead; the CG bead is
located on the center-of-mass of the monomer. (c) At the highly CG slip-spring level, 12 successive monomers
of PB are lumped into one CG bead; here, the CG bead is located on the position of the 6th monomer. At
this level of coarse-graining, the polymer chain is modeled as an ideal Gaussian chain, and entanglements are
incorporated via slip-springs (red).

3 Moderately coarse-grained (mCG) model

3.1 Parametrization of the mCG model

At the mCG level, each monomer of cPB is mapped onto one coarse-grained bead. For mapping, one mCG
bead is placed on the center-of-mass of each monomer of the atomistic chains (see Figure 1b). This model has
the advantage of retaining structural features and therefore conserving the chemical identity of the atomistic
model. To develop the mCG force ﬁeld, it is assumed that the eﬀective potential energy (in fact, free energy)
of a mCG bead can be separated into bonded and pairwise nonbonded parts. Furthermore, the bonded
interactions involve contributions from bonds, angles, and dihedral angles:

U CG = U CG

nonbonded(r) + U CG

bond(l) + U CG

angle(θ) + U CG

dihedral(φ)

(1)

4

Here, r, l, θ, and φ are the distance between two mCG beads, mCG bond length, mCG bending angle, and
mCG dihedral angle, respectively. Consistent with the above assumption, it is assumed that the probability
distribution function of l, θ, and φ can be factorized into independent distribution functions:

P (l, θ, φ) = P (l)P (θ)P (φ)

(2)

The probability distribution functions are calculated from the atomistic simulations and then converted
to mCG potentials through the iterative Boltzmann inversion method. 9 This method iteratively matches
the probability distribution functions of the mCG model to the respective atomistic distributions, called
target distributions. Similarly, the nonbonded mCG potentials are obtained by matching the (intra- and
inter-molecular) radial pair distribution function, g(r), of the mCG model to that of the atomistic model.
The initial guess for the mCG potentials are the Boltzmann inverse of the target distributions:

U CG

nonbonded, 0(r) = −kBT ln gtarget(r)

U CG
U CG

bond, 0(l) = −kBT ln(Ptarget(l)/l2)
angle, 0(θ) = −kBT ln(Ptarget(θ)/ sin θ)

U CG

dihedral, 0(φ) = −kBT ln Ptarget(φ)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Here, distributions of bond length and bending angle are normalized by taking into account their respective
volume elements, l2 and sin θ (ignoring numerical prefactors) . 1 The mCG potentials are then modiﬁed in an
iterative procedure through: 9

U CG

i+1(ξ) = U CG

i

(ξ) + kBT ln

Pi(ξ)
Ptarget(ξ)

(7)

where ξ stands for r, l, θ, and φ. The iteration is performed until the convergence of all mCG distributions
to their corresponding target distributions is achieved. Convergence of a distribution is conﬁrmed through
the minimization of a merit function, deﬁned as:

fmerit =

(cid:82) ξmax
ξmin

(Ptarget(ξ) − P (ξ))2dξ
(cid:82) ξmax
ξmin

target(ξ)dξ

P 2

(8)

Furthermore, to correct the pressure of the mCG model, a pressure correction step is added to the above
iterative procedure (Equation 7). 9,49 Without applying pressure correction, with similar densities, the pressure
of the mCG model is usually higher than the pressure of the atomistic model. For the pressure correction, a
linear term is added to the nonbonded potential function: 9,49

∆U CG

nonbonded(r) = A(1 −

r
rcut

)

(9)

where A is an empirical constant and rcut is the cut-oﬀ distance for the calculation of the nonbonded
interactions.

For the development of the mCG force ﬁeld for cPB at 413 K, the reference atomistic simulations were
performed for 30-mer chains. The developed bonded and nonbonded potentials together with the plots of
g(r), P (l), P (θ), and P (φ) as calculated from the mCG and reference atomistic simulations are provided in
Figure 2. For all distributions, a good agreement between the results of the mCG simulation and the atomistic
simulation is observed, indicating the success of the iterative Boltzmann inversion procedure. All mCG runs
were performed in the NPT ensemble. Stochastic rescaling thermostat 50 and Parrinello-Rahman barostat 47
were used to control temperature and pressure. The maximum range of mCG nonbonded interactions was 1.5
nm and nonbonded interactions were excluded for ﬁrst, second, and third chemically bonded mCG beads.
The elimination of the fast degrees of freedom (e. g., covalent bond vibrations) and the softness of nonbonded
potential allow for the increase of the time step in mCG simulations relative to atomistic simulations. For
mCG simulations, a leap-frog integration scheme with a 5 fs time step was used.

Although the nonbonded interactions of the mCG model are softer than the atomistic one, due to the
chosen mapping scheme (one mCG bead corresponds to 4 united atoms or one monomer) they are still
strong enough to prevent chain crossing. In addition, the bonds between mCG beads are ﬁnitely extensible
(see Figure 2b). Hence, the mCG model respects the topological constraints, something that is required to
describe polymer dynamics, especially of high molecular weight, entangled, systems.

5

Figure 2: The developed nonbonded and bonded mCG potentials together with the target atomistic local
structural distributions and the distributions obtained from mCG simulations. (a) Nonbonded mCG pair
potential and RDF (excluding the ﬁrst three bonded neighbours) of mCG beads (labeled as C4) from atomistic
and mCG simulations. (b) Bond stretching mCG potential and the distribution of C4-C4 bond lengths. (c)
Bending potential and the distribution of C4-C4-C4 angles. (d) Torsional potential of the mCG model and
the distribution of C4-C4-C4-C4 dihedral angles (φ = 0 corresponds to the cis torsional state).

3.2 Chain dimensions

As discussed above, the parameterization of the mCG interactions is performed based on the matching of
the local structure of the mCG model to that of the atomistic model. Hence, the mCG model reproduces
the local structure well. It is also important to verify the larger scale dimensions of the atomistic and mCG
chains. In Figure 3a the mean-squared internal distances, analyzed at the level of monomers, for the atomistic
and mCG models of 200-mer cPB chains, are shown. In Figure 3a, (cid:104)R2(n)(cid:105) is the end-to-end distance of a
sub-chain containing n mCG bonds (n + 1 monomers). A reasonable agreement between the internal distances
of the mCG and atomistic models are observed, however, at large scales, the mCG model has a slightly
(around 5%) longer internal distances than the atomistic model. In Figure 3b the mean-squared end-to-end
distances, (cid:104)R2
g(cid:105), of the atomistic and mCG chains of various
lengths are presented. Similar to the trend that is observed for 200-mer chain, the end-to-end distances of the
mCG models are close to those of the atomistic chains. Also, with increasing chain length, the chain-length
dependence of (cid:104)R2
g(cid:105) approach the expected Gaussian behavior
((cid:104)R2
g(cid:105) ∝ N ). This eﬀect is important to verify for our highest CG model, the SLSP model, which
models the polymers as ﬂexible chains. For short atomistic and mCG chains (shorter than 30-mer) the (cid:104)R2
ee(cid:105)
(cid:104)R2
g(cid:105)
values are larger than 6.2; however, with increasing chain length (cid:104)R2
ee(cid:105)
g(cid:105) tends to 6.0 which is the expected
(cid:104)R2

ee(cid:105), and the mean-squared gyration radii, (cid:104)R2

ee(cid:105) and the chain-length dependence of (cid:104)R2

ee(cid:105), (cid:104)R2

6

0.00.51.01.52.0r (nm)0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2g(r)C4, C4(a)atomisticmCG50510152025303540UCG(r) (kJ mol−1)0.20.30.40.50.60.7l (nm)024681012P(l)(b)C4-C4 bondsatomisticmCG020406080100120UCG(l) (kJ mol−1)306090120150180θ (degree)0.0000.0040.0080.0120.016P(θ)C4-C4-C4 angles(c)atomisticmCG051015202530UCG(θ) (kJ mol−1)18012060060120180φ (degree)0.0020.0030.004P(φ)C4-C4-C4-C4 dihedral angles(d)atomisticmCG0.00.51.01.52.0UCG(φ) (kJ mol−1)Figure 3: (a) Mean-squared internal distances, analyzed at the level of monomers, for atomistic, mCG, SLSP
models of 200-mer cPB. (b) Mean-squared end-to-end distance, (cid:104)R2
ee(cid:105), and mean-squared radius of gyration,
(cid:104)R2
g(cid:105), for the atomistic and mCG model chains of diﬀerent lengths.

value for the Gaussian chains (for chains longer than 30-mer, most of the (cid:104)R2
ee(cid:105)
g(cid:105) values are less than 6.05).
(cid:104)R2

3.3 Time scaling

The prediction of the dynamical properties of the underlying atomistic model through mCG simulations is of
paramount importance. However, because the friction associated with the fast degrees of freedom that are
averaged out is ignored in the mCG model (i. e., a calibrated friction is not involved in the CG equations of
motion), the dynamics of the mCG system is faster than the dynamics of the atomistic one. 3,4 Therefore, it
is necessary to convert the dynamic quantities of the mCG model to those of the atomistic one. Here, for
reproducing the atomistic dynamics, the mCG time is scaled by a factor t∗
mCG, called, time scaling factor. A
similar procedure has also been used in previous works. 4,10,12

In terms of the Rouse and the tube models, the dynamics of unentangled chains are controlled by a
monomeric friction coeﬃcient and the dynamics of entangled chains are controlled by a monomeric friction
coeﬃcient and a tube diameter. 51 Because the mCG model preserves the chemical identity of the atomistic
model, its tube diameter, which is a geometrical quantity, is expected to be similar to the tube diameter
of the atomistic system (in subsubsection 5.1.2 we investigate the crossover from the unentangled to the
entangled regime and atomistic and mCG models exhibit a similar behavior which is consistent with the
development of a similar entanglement network by both models). So, the faster dynamics of the mCG system
is attributed to its lower monomeric friction coeﬃcient. Given that the relaxation times of unentangled and
entangled chains are proportional to monomeric friction coeﬃcient (τ ∝ ζ), 51 the time scaling factor that is
needed for matching mCG dynamics and atomistic dynamics can be seen as the ratio of their monomeric

7

100101102n (number of mCG bonds)0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6›R2(n)ﬁ/n (nm2)cisPB-200mer(a)atomisticmCGSLSP101102103N (number of monomers)100101102103›R2eeﬁ, ›R2gﬁ  (nm2) ›R2eeﬁ∝N›R2gﬁ∝N(b)atomisticmCGmCG = ζAT

friction coeﬃcients, t∗
t∗
mCG would reproduce all dynamical properties of the underlying atomistic model.

ζmCG . 10 Note that, in practice, it should be checked if a single time scaling factor

For the determination of t∗

mCG, we scaled the mCG time to match the overall chain (translational and
orientational) dynamics at the atomistic level. Translational dynamics is investigated by calculating mean-
squared displacement (MSD) of monomers, g1(t), and chain centers-of-mass, g3(t). Orientational dynamics is
studied through the orientational autocorrelation function of the end-to-end vector, P (t), deﬁned as:

P (t) = (cid:104) ˆRe(t) · ˆRe(0)(cid:105).

(10)

where ˆRe is the normalized end-to-end vector and (cid:104)(cid:105) shows averaging over an ensemble of polymer chains,
which is approximated by all chains in the simulation box and all time origins. In addition, we check the
mCG model predictions for the shear stress relaxation modulus, G(t), which can be calculated through the
autocorrelation of shear stresses: 52

G(t) =

V
kBT

(cid:104)σij(t) σij(0)(cid:105), i (cid:54)= j

(11)

where V , kB, T , and σij are volume of the system, Boltzmann constant, temperature, and an oﬀ-diagonal
component of the stress tensor, respectively. (cid:104)(cid:105) shows averaging over the oﬀ-diagonal components (for isotropic
systems) of the stress tensor and time origins. To improve the statistics, one can average over all possible
orientations of the coordinate system. 52 Multiple-tau correlator algorithm has been used for the calculation
of G(t). 53

Typically, the mCG time is scaled to match one dynamical quantity, e. g., g1(t), and then the predictions
of the mCG simulations for other dynamical quantities (e. g., g3(t), P (t), or G(t)) are checked. For short
chains, it would be more accurate to match P (t), and G(t) as well, using a time scaling factor that is slightly
diﬀerent from the time scaling factor extracted from ﬁtting g1(t) and g3(t); for 30-mer and shorter chains, the
time scaling factor needed for matching P (t) and G(t) is around 10–15% smaller than the factor extracted
from ﬁtting g1(t) and g3(t). Such deviations observed for shorter chains are not unexpected and are related
mainly to the importance of the chain ends of such systems. Since the interactions of the mCG model involve
entropic terms, the end monomers should, in principle, be described via a diﬀerent interaction. However,
since the main goal of the mCG model is to describe high molecular weight systems, such diﬀerences are
typically ignored. For 100-mer and longer chains, a single scaling factor has been found to describe accurately
the above-mentioned dynamical quantities.

Figure 4 shows the MSD (g1(t) and g3(t)), P (t), and G(t) for 100-mer cPB, from atomistic and mCG
simulations (t∗
mCG = 4.9). As shown in Figure 4a, apart from very short length and timescales (distances less
than 5 ˚A ≈ the size of the mCG beads), the MSD curves calculated through mCG simulations nicely follow
the corresponding atomistic ones. Also, as shown in Figure 4b, the P (t) curves calculated through atomistic
and mCG simulations exhibit a good agreement. The G(t) curves of 100-mer cPB from atomistic and mCG
simulations are depicted in Figure 4c. At short times G(t) of the atomistic model shows large oscillations.
The oscillations range from large positive values to large negative values (the negative values are not shown in
logarithmic scale) and originate from fast motions, e. g., bond vibrations and angle librations, in the atomistic
model. After such vibrational motions, segmental relaxation and then, polymeric relaxations (Rouse-like and
reptation-like, see also subsection 5.2) take place. Because of the presence of rather soft bonds, the G(t) of
the mCG model does not show large oscillations at very short times; however, mild oscillations happen after
segmental relaxation. The time of the oscillations corresponds to the period of the bond vibration for the
mCG chain, which is around 400 fs, before scaling. Similar to the results of MSD, after very short timescales
(after the segmental relaxation time), the mCG model reproduces the G(t) of the atomistic model well.

The time scaling factor, t∗
mCG is presented in Figure 5. By increasing chain length, ﬁrst t∗

mCG, is chain-length and temperature dependent. The chain-length dependence
of t∗
mCG increases and then converges to a
constant value. A similar trend has been reported in previous works. 10,12 The chain-length dependence of
the density is also shown in Figure 5. The densities were calculated from atomistic simulations; however,
because of the application of pressure correction, the densities of the mCG melts are very similar to the
atomistic ones (for all chain lengths, the diﬀerence is less than 1.5%). The chain-length dependence of t∗
mCG
is in phase with the chain-length dependence of density. This behavior can be justiﬁed in terms of the free
volume theory 54,55 which attributes the chain length dependence of both density and monomeric friction

8

Figure 4: (a) MSD for chain center-of-mass (g3(t)) and monomer center-of-mass (g1(t)) for 100-mer chains of
cPB at 413 K through atomistic and mCG simulations. (b) Orientational autocorrelation function, P (t),
of end-to-end vector and (c) stress relaxation modulus, G(t), for 100-mer cPB through atomistic and mCG
simulations. In all cases, the mCG times are scaled with a single time scaling factor (t∗
mCG = 4.9), computed
by scaling the mCG time to match the atomistic g1(t) in the long time (diﬀusive) regime.

coeﬃcient, ζ, of a polymer melt to the excess free volume accompanying chain ends; however, for long chains,
the contribution of chain ends in the free volume of the polymer melt becomes negligible and the density and
ζ remain constant.

It is assumed that the chain length dependence of the fractional free volume, f , of a polymer melt is
similar to the chain length dependence of its speciﬁc volume. At a ﬁxed temperature, the relations between ζ,

9

10-310-210-1100101102103104t (ns)10-210-1100101102103MSD(t)  (nm2)CisPB-100mert1(a)g1(t), atomisticg1(t), mCGg3(t), atomisticg3(t), mCG10-310-210-1100101102103104t (ns)0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(t)(b)atomisticmCG10-610-510-410-310-210-1100101102103t (ns)10-1100101102103104105106G(t) (bar)(c)atomisticmCGFigure 5: Chain-length dependence of time scaling factor, t∗
and mCG MSDs, at 413 K. Additionally, the chain length dependence of density, ρ, and (inset) t∗
are presented.

mCG, calculated through matching of atomistic
mCG vs. ρ

f , and density are as follows: 54,55

ζ(M ) = ζ∞ exp(B(

1
f (M )

−

1
f∞

)),

f (M ) − f∞ = 1 −

ρ(M )
ρ∞

(12)

where f∞, ρ∞, and ζ∞ are fractional free volume, density, and monomeric friction coeﬃcient of very high
molecular weight melts, and B is a constant of order of unity. 54,55 Based on the above expression, it is
ζmCG , tend to constant values. 10,56 Also,
expected that when ρ → ρ∞, ζ AT and ζ mCG, and therefore t∗
when ρ is close to ρ∞, Equation 12 becomes a linear relation between ln ζ (and therefore ln t∗
mCG) and ρ. Inset
of Figure 5 shows that values of t∗
mCG as a function of ρ. With increasing density, the monomeric friction
coeﬃcients of both atomistic and mCG melts increase; however, the increase of t∗
mCG with density shows that
the increase of ζ is larger for the atomistic model than for the mCG one. The constant value of t∗
mCG for long
chains can be used to simulate the dynamics of long chains, for which the atomistic simulation is not feasible.
The above-mentioned procedure for the prediction of the dynamics of the atomistic model through mCG
simulations applies to the study of the dynamics of structurally complex polymers, e.g., long-chain branched
polymers; however, the value of the time scaling factor might be slightly diﬀerent than that of linear chains.

mCG = ζAT

4 Slip-spring (SLSP) model

In our highly coarse-grained SLSP model, a polymer is represented by a string of beads. A single bead
or CG segment represents multiple monomeric repeating units of an atomistic model. In the present cPB
SLSP model, a coarse-grained bead approximately represents 12 monomers (or 48 united-atom groups).
The Kuhn length of cPB chains is approximately equal to 1nm, corresponding to ≈ 9 backbone bonds (or
10 CHx groups), 44 i. e., 12 monomers are comprised of 5.2 Kuhn segments. We chose 12 as the degree of
coarse-graining, because it is the smallest number of monomeric repeating units that allows a description via
the ﬂexible Gaussian chain model, compare with Figure 3. We should note that it might be advantageous to
employ SLSP models with a larger degree of coarse-graining to eﬃciently simulate longer chains on larger
spatiotemporal scales (thereby potentially losing resolution on the scale of the tube diameter). However,
the parameterization of such even coarser CG models would require data from (computationally expensive)
mCG-based simulations of longer chains than what is needed for the SLSP model with a smaller degree of
coarse-graining. In any case, the parameter-passing strategy would be similar to the strategy used here. In
the following, we use a chain of NSLSP = 32 beads to describe a 400-mer cPB molecule (and account for the
mismatch by ignoring the 8 monomeric repeating units at the ends of the mCG chain in the analysis).

10

050100150200N (chain length)2.53.03.54.04.55.05.5t∗mCGt∗mCG800810820830840850860870ρ (kg m−3)ρ800830860ρ (kg m−3)100101t∗mCGThe parameterization of the SLSP model is performed based on the results of the mCG simulations.
To transfer information between mCG and SLSP levels, ﬁrst, the mCG coordinates should be mapped to
the mesoscopic SLSP presentation. To map mCG coordinates to SLSP coordinates, for each successive 12
monomers, a CG bead is placed on the position of the monomer that has the median index (here, on the 6th
monomer). Let 0 ≤ imCG < 400 denote the bead index in the mCG model, then the position of the ith bead
of the SLSP model coincides with the coordinate of the mCG bead with index imCG = 13 + 12i, see Figure 1.
A similar mapping scheme has been used before. 37

One can think of an alternative mapping scheme, in which a CG bead is placed on the center-of-mass of
each successive 12 monomers (similar to mapping atomistic coordinates to mCG coordinates). To compare
these two mapping schemes, we applied them to cPB, as well as to an ensemble of ideal chains (freely jointed
chains). The distribution of bead-bead-bead angle (after mapping) for cPB and ideal chains are provided
in Figure 6. It is clear that for both cPB and ideal chains, the center-of-mass mapping scheme leads to a
non-random distribution of angles between three successive beads. Such behavior has also been previously
observed for CG models of polyethylene. 37

Figure 6: Distributions of bead-bead-bead angle (P (cos θ)) through median index (med) and center-of-mass
(com) mapping schemes. The results are shown for cPB and the ideal chain. For cPB one bead represents 12
monomers and for the ideal chain, one bead represents 12 nodes of the chain.

It is instructive to consider these two mapping schemes for an ideal chain with bead positions ri and
uncorrelated bond vectors bi = ri+1 − ri. For a degree of coarse-graining of 2 and the center-of-mass mapping,
the scalar product of two successive, coarse-grained bond vectors, bCG
2 [b0 +2b1 +b2]
and bCG
(cid:54)= 0. There are
no next-nearest or higher bond correlations and the mean-squared length of a coarse-grained bond is
(cid:104)(bCG)2(cid:105) = 3

2 [b2 + 2b3 + b4| does not vanish (cid:104)bCG

2 [r5 + r4 − r3 − r2] = 1

2 [r3 +r2 −r1 −r0] = 1

(cid:105) = (cid:104)b2(cid:105)
4

1 = 1

0 = 1

0 bCG
1

2 (cid:104)b2(cid:105).

On the contrary, identifying every second bead position with the position of a coarse-grained bead, we
0 = r2 − r0 = b0 + b1 and bCG
0 = r4 − r2 = b2 + b3, yielding
(cid:105) = 0. There are also no next-nearest or higher bond correlations and the mean-squared length of a

obtain for the coarse-grained bonds bCG
(cid:104)bCG
coarse-grained bond is (cid:104)(bCG)2(cid:105) = 2(cid:104)b2(cid:105).

0 bCG
1

Figure 6 demonstrates that choosing every 12th mCG bead position also results in a random angular
distribution for the ideal chain. There remains, however, a slight deviation for cPB chains. These residual
bond-angle correlations arise (i) because a 12-mer only comprises 5.2 Kuhn segments and (ii) due to the
incompressibility of the melt, resulting in universal, power-law, bond-bond correlations. 57 The latter universal
eﬀect is also present in the highly coarse-grained SLSP model. The former eﬀect could be accounted for in
the SLSP model by a bond-angle potential or could be reduced by choosing a larger degree of coarse-graining.
In the following, however, we neglect this small deviation for computational convenience. As we base our
parameter passing on the end-to-end distance, the large-scale structures of the mCG and SLSP models
coincide, but the bond length of the fully ﬂexible SLSP model is slightly longer than an SLSP model with
positive correlations between successive bonds.

11

1.00.50.00.51.0cosθ0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(cosθ)cPB-med1:12cPB-com1:12ideal_chain-med1:12ideal_chain-com1:12SLSP modelThe interaction potential between CG beads is soft, i. e., beads can fully overlap without divergence of
the nonbonded energy, in marked contrast to the two previously discussed, ﬁner levels of modeling. The
softness arises from a systematic coarse-graining procedure. 58 The reduction of the degrees of freedom and
the softness of the potentials in highly coarse-grained models, allowing for larger time steps, give rise to a
signiﬁcant computational speed-up.

Moreover, softness is necessary to represent the large invariant degree of polymerization, ¯N = ( ρ

e0)2 =
(ρb3)2N that characterizes experimental systems. 6 Here ρ, N , and b denote the bead density, the number
of beads per chain, and the statistical segment length, respectively. To represent a large value of ¯N , one
can either increase N at ﬁxed ρ and b or increase the degree of coarse-graining such that N of the highly
coarse-grained chain model remains unaltered but increase ρb3 instead. The latter is computationally much
more convenient. 6 Harsh repulsive interactions on a length scale σ, however, do not allow for an increase
of the segment density beyond ρσ3 ∼ O(1) because the system either crystallizes or vitriﬁes. Additionally
requiring that the combination of segmental repulsion and ﬁnite bond length, l, prevents chain crossing,
yields the condition σ ≈ l ∼ b, where the last relation holds for ﬂexible chains. Thus, it is diﬃcult to increase
ρb3 signiﬁcant beyond order 1 for ﬂexible chain models, in which pairwise interactions prevent chain crossing
and large invariant degrees of polymerization necessitate a ﬁne discretization of the chain contour.

N R3

We perform all simulations of the SLSP model with the GPU accelerated simulation software HOOMD-
blue 59–61 with custom SLSP-plugins. The combination of a highly coarse-grained model with modern,
GPU-accelerated computers expands the study possibilities of the two previous models to higher molecular
weights and longer timescales.

The nonbonded interaction of the model employed in our molecular dynamics simulation is an empirical
pairwise potential. The potential has a two-fold purpose: (i) It suppresses density ﬂuctuations and (ii)
controls the repulsion of unlike bead types (in multicomponent systems). The potential is soft and quadratic,
and it takes the form

Vnb(r) = Aij

kBT
2

(cid:18)

1 −

(cid:19)2

|r|
σ

for |r| < σ.

(13)

σ deﬁnes the interaction range of this potential. The parameter Aii correlates to the inverse compressibility
and Aij controls the repulsion of unlike bead types. The subscript ij indicates the type of interacting particles.
In this work we only describe beads for i =cPB, hence there is only a single interaction parameter Aii. To
convert the simulations from the microcanonical ensemble (NVE) to the canonical ensemble (NVT) we add
random forces and friction according to the dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) thermostat. 62 We use a
friction and ﬂuctuation value γDPD = 1/τ for all reported simulations with the SLSP model. We choose this
value to allow an early transition from ballistic motion to overdamped motion. For a more detailed discussion
of this DPD parameter and its eﬀect in the context of the SLSP model, we refer to Ref. 63

For this work we selected a nonbonded interaction parameter of Aii = 5. In previous works, we have used
values Aii smaller by as much as an order of magnitude Aii. 18 Using the higher value does not guarantee a
clear separation in strength between bonded and nonbonded interactions. However, the advantage of this
higher value is that the compressibility characteristics of the melt are closer to the mCG and atomistic
description. The empiric potential does not feature an attractive tail so the measured pressure is large
compared to the experiment. Adjusting the pressure would require a longer-ranged attractive interaction
that does hardly inﬂuence the liquid structure but signiﬁcantly adds to the computational costs. If required
the eﬀect of such an additional attraction could be accounted for by thermodynamic perturbation theory. 64
The Ncg beads are bonded along the backbone by a bond-length potential that not only captures the
Gaussian equilibrium statistics but, additionally, mimics the reduced extensibility for strong elongations and
accounts for corrections to the limit of large degree of coarse-graining.

Vb(r) =

k2
2

r2 +

k4
2

r4.

(14)

with r being the distance between bonded neighbors. In the limit k4 = 0 the potential coincides with the
discretized Edwards Hamiltonian of a Gaussian chain. 65

The harmonic potential is a direct consequence of the coarse-graining procedure in the limit of inﬁnitely
long chains. If the degree of coarse-graining is much larger than the Kuhn length, a highly coarse-grained
bead is comprised of many Kuhn segments. The end-to-end distance of such a subchain that is represented

12

Figure 7: Distribution, p(z), of the extension of 12-mer subchain in a polymer of 100 or 400 monomeric
repeating units, obtained by simulations of the mCG model. For the highly coarse-grained SLSP model a
12-mer is represented by a single bead. The speciﬁc shape of the mCG distribution depends on the chain
length, as demonstrated with ﬁts to 400-mer and 100-mer data set. We assume a Boltzmann distribution
exp(−Vb(r)/kBT ) for the bond-length distribution to ﬁt the free parameters of diﬀerent bond potentials.
This assumption is veriﬁed by data of the SLSP model shown as stars.

by a coarse-grained bead is the sum of many, independent, identically distributed contributions and its
distribution converges towards a Gaussian. Therefore top-down models utilize harmonic bonds that represent
the relevant property – chain connectivity – in a universal and computationally eﬃcient way.

Here we go beyond this top-down strategy. The additional fourth-order term in Equation 14 is a ﬁrst,
systematic attempt to incorporate deviations from the asymptotic Gaussian behavior that occurs for small
degrees of coarse-graining. The speciﬁc shape of using a fourth-order expansion is inspired by the original
description of Kuhn et. al. 66 for an inverse Langevin, which were appropriate if we model a freely jointed
chain (FJC) model. Moreover, in nonequilibrium situations that include the stretching of chains, the
Gaussian chain model may no longer be appropriate. An intuitive example is the contour length. As it is
well-known, 66,67 any real chain has a ﬁxed contour length but this constraint is not enforced in a Gaussian
chain.

We examine possible deviations from the Gaussian behavior by monitoring the bond extension, z, along a
speciﬁed axis (for isotropic bulk polymer melts, all axis are equivalent). In the Gaussian chain model with
harmonic bonds this distribution, p(z), is Gaussian. However, the distribution of distances between 12-mers –
the length of an SLSP bead – in a 400-mer chain shows a stronger decay for large bond lengths.

Figure 7 visualizes the results of the mCG model in comparison to the Boltzmann distributions of single
bonds in the SLSP model. Fitting the distribution to the data from the mCG simulations allows us to
determine the optimal parameters for our bond potential. We illustrate this procedure for the harmonic,
expanded fourth-order, and ﬁnite extensible nonlinear elastic (FENE) potential. All three potentials provide
a reasonable ﬁt to the mCG data, yet small but systematic deviations can be appreciated in the inset that
highlights the tails of the distribution on a logarithmic scale. The harmonic potential overestimates the
weight of the tails in the distribution. The FENE potential has a ﬁnite length as it is required to obtain a
ﬁnite contour length and, in turn, underestimates the weight of the tails of the distribution. We obtain the

13

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2z/0.00.20.40.60.8p(z)mCG data (400mer)SLSP data (400mer)harmonic fitFENE fitfourth order fit (400mer)fourth order fit (100mer)1.01.11.21.31.4102101best ﬁt with the fourth-order potential from Equation 14.

The parameters of the fourth-order potential slightly depend on the chain length in the mCG model
system. However, we are interested in a universal, chain-length independent bond potential. As a compromise
we utilize the parameters k2 ≈ 3.30kBT /σ2 and k4 = 2.41kBT /σ4 for the fourth order potential. The resulting
distribution provides a good agreement in the center as well as in the tails of the distribution and improves
upon the harmonic or FENE potential. We identify the basic length scale, σ, of interactions in the SLSP
model by the root-mean-squared bond length, b0 = 0.75σ

The use of soft, CG polymer models to study dynamics poses challenges that are addressed by speciﬁc
extensions to the standard bead-spring model: To analyze the dynamical characteristics of long polymers it
is vital to include entanglement eﬀects. Unfortunately, the inevitable softness of the nonbonded interactions
in a highly CG model does not implicitly prevent backbone-crossing. To compensate this eﬀect, we use the
SLSP model, 18 which represents entanglements via additional bonds – slip-springs (SLSPs). The dynamics
of SLSPs is designed to accurately mimic the reptation motion of long polymer chains in a dense melt, going
beyond the classical tube model 51 by including constraint release and contour-length ﬂuctuations 24 and
allowing the study of spatially inhomogeneous systems. 29

The SLSP model 18 adds additional bonds to the system, which enforce spatial constraints similar to
entanglements. As will become apparent later, the bond potential has to be of ﬁnite range, so we use the
FENE potential

Vss(r) = −

kssr2
ss
2

(cid:34)

log

1 −

(cid:19)2(cid:35)

.

(cid:18) r
rss

(15)

The maximum extension is set for eﬃciency reasons to rss = σ, i. e., the interaction range of the nonbonded
potential. The origin of the SLSP force is the same as the backbone potential, however, for technical reasons
the potential has to be of ﬁnite range so we opt for the FENE potential, with force constants that mimics
the backbone potential. 18 The insertion and movement of the additional slip spring bonds are governed by
kinetic Monte-Carlo moves, sampling the grand-canonical ensemble. The chemical potential µ of the slip
springs dictate the average number of SLSPs. More commonly we use the fugacity z = exp(βµ) ∝ nss, which
is directly proportional to the number of SLSPs. The introduction of additional bonds into the systems
changes the system properties, especially the pressure. To eliminate this eﬀect, an additional, repulsive pair
potential is introduced

Vcomp(r) = zkBT exp(−βVss(r)).

(16)

This potential exactly compensates the introduction of the slip springs in the partition function. 18 Thus, all
static properties remain unchanged, independent of the SLSP fugacity, z. Only the dynamical properties
change to incorporate the eﬀect of entanglements.

The dynamics of the SLSPs is governed by kinetic MC moves, designed to mimic reptation dynamics.
The MC move that attempts to slide each SLSP along the backbone (reptation) and the MC move that
transfers SLSP from one chain end to another (dis/re-entanglement and constraint release) are applied with
a frequency of ∆t = 0.5τ . This timescale corresponds to the relaxation time of a bead in our highly CG
model, i. e., beads, and SLSP move on the same timescale. Speciﬁcally, the MSD of beads within 10τ is
about the average length of the backbone bonds. The attempt frequency of the MC move is high enough to
not signiﬁcantly change the dynamics if the frequency were further increased. These two MC moves – SLSP
sliding and end-transfer – suﬃce to study the dynamics but the number of SLSP remains constant.

Additionally, we apply a MC move that attempts to create or delete new SLSP at the chain ends. This
MC move realizes the grand canonical SLSP ensemble. The MC move is computationally more expensive
and thus is attempted only every ∆t = 10τ . The MC that control the creation and deletion of SLSPs at
the end of the polymer molecules controls the tube renewal in the entangled systems. The chosen update
frequency is high enough that the tube renewal in accordance with the diﬀusion of the individual particle
beads. Increasing the frequency further does not change the result, but a lower frequency eventually leads to
delayed tube-renewal dynamics. As a result, the transition into free diﬀusion of the tube would happen later
than justiﬁed by the number of topological constraints present in the system.

14

4.1 Parametrization of the SLSP models

Utilizing the SLSP model to predict properties of real polymeric systems requires a mapping of the model
parameters to physical units. In our systematic approach, this parameter matching builds upon the results of
two ﬁner-grained models – the atomistic and moderately coarse-grained (mCG) model. In this section, we
detail how we use the results of the mCG model to identify the length and timescale of the SLSP model for a
speciﬁc polymer, cPB. We use the results of the mCG model for a 400-mer melt because this longest chain
length, accessible to the lower-scale models, exhibits the most pronounced entanglement eﬀects.

√

One particularly important characteristics of our soft, CG modeling strategy is the independent mapping
of static equilibrium properties and of dynamical properties of polymer melts. First, we identify the length
scale to match the static single-chain properties of a 400-mer cPB system. The conﬁgurations of long ﬂexible
polymer chains in a dense melt are characterized by a single relevant length scale – the mean-squared
end-to-end distance, (cid:104)R2
0 = N (0.75σ)2. By
ee(cid:105). In the absence of nonbonded interactions we obtain R2
matching this chain extension to the result of the mCG model, (cid:112)(cid:104)R2
ee(cid:105) = 13.446 nm for a 400mer cPB, we
identify the internal unit of length, σ, in our simulation model, σ = 3.07 ± 0.06 nm.

e0 = N b2

N R3

The invariant degree of polymerization

e0 ≈ 1.0552. This minor, state-dependent eﬀect is neglected in the following.

¯N = ρ
e0 quantiﬁes the chain density and is independent from
¯N ≈ 59.3.
the degree of coarse-graining. The density and chain extension of the mCG model corresponds to
This density requires n = 926 chain in the SLSP model for a cubic simulation box with length L = 2.5Re0.
In a melt, the ratio between the bare R2
e0 and the actual measured end-to-end distance slightly depends on
chain length and density, due to the chain end eﬀect. For the speciﬁc system the ratio adopts the value,
(cid:104)R2

ee(cid:105)/R2
Second, we adjust the parameters of our model to match the dynamics of the mCG model. We note that
the parameters that dictate the dynamics are independent of those that determine the static properties. The
unentangled dynamics require the identiﬁcation of segmental friction and the timescale mapping, t∗
SS, between
our soft, CG model, and the results of the mCG model. We have reduced the monomeric friction but the
crossover from ballistic to diﬀusive segment motion still occurs on short time scales that are irrelevant to
the analysis. For the longer, entangled chains, we additionally adjust the SLSP parameters, i. e., the SLSP
fugacity, z.

√

In the spirit of top-down modeling, we could adjust t∗

SS and z to match experimental data. Here, instead,
we follow a diﬀerent approach using the available data of the mCG model to identify the timescale factor
and SLSP fugacity. This parameter passing is based on the expectation that the SLSP model does not only
capture the dynamics of well-entangled polymer melts but also accurately describes the broad crossover from
unentangled to entangled polymer dynamics.

To identify the timescale and SLSP fugacity, we decided to focus on the decorrelation of the normalized
end-to-end vector P (t) (cf. Equation 10). This quantity is particularly suited to determine the timescale
matching between the mCG model and SLSP model because it can be determined with high accuracy in
both models and allows an accurate timescale matching due to its characteristic decay.

For the two extreme descriptions of entanglement eﬀects – the Rouse model 68 and the tube model 51 –
there exist explicit predictions for P (t). In the Rouse model, appropriate for unentangled, short polymer,
P (t) adopts the form: 51

PRouse(t|τR) =

(cid:88)

p:odd

8
p2π2 exp(−p2t/τR)

(17)

with τR being the Rouse time. The tube model 51 predicts the identical shape, Ptube(t) = PRouse(t|τd), but
the characteristic timescale is the disentanglement time, τd.

For the timescale mapping, we scale the intrinsic simulation time of the SLSP model by a factor t∗
SS to
match the results of the mCG model. Since we allow this time scaling, the Rouse model and the tube model
predict the identical shape of P (t), making it a robust quantity to match the timescale over the entire regime
of molecular weights.

Figure 8 illustrates this timescale matching via the end-to-end vector correlation P (t). By choosing
multiple (here two) diﬀerent ”match points”, tm, to overlay the results, we visually demonstrate that the
shape of P (t) depends on the entanglement density. This deviation is present for the results of the mCG
model and all SLSP results, with z > 0.

15

(a) Matching the timescale t∗

SS for short timescales.

(b) Matching the timescale t∗

SS for long timescales.

Figure 8: Timescale matching via the end-to-end vector correlation P (t). The matching is obtained by
horizontally shifting results of the SLSP model (on a logarithmic scale) until they overlay the mCG results
at the ”match point”. In general, agreement at diﬀerent ”match points”, tm, is observed for a diﬀerent
combination of timescale, t∗
SS, and SLSP fugacity, z, because the shape of the curve depends on the
entanglement density. Only for the speciﬁc SLSP fugacity z ≈ 0.0228, is the resulting timescale mapping, t∗
SS,
independent of the ”match point”, tm. For reference, we also present P (t) of the Rouse and tube model. It
matches the results of z = 0, i. e., no SLSPs.

A deviation is expected because the 400-mer polymer chains are long enough to deviate from the Rouse
model but yet not suﬃciently long to comply with the idealization of the tube model, which only applies to
strongly entangled melts since the tube model neglects constraint release and contour-length ﬂuctuations.
The deviation of the mCG model indicates that these eﬀects are relevant, particular for the rather short
chains. The fact that these deviations are also observed in the SLSP model demonstrates that the SLSP
description goes beyond the Rouse and tube models respectively.

We can use the shape changes, as depicted in Figure 8, to determine not only a timescale mapping but
also the optimal number of SLSP per chain, controlled by the fugacity, z, in our SLSP model. The premise
is: For the optimal number of SLSP per chain is the mapping factor t∗
SS independent of the ”match point”,
where the result is overlaid. Hence, we use the two chosen ”match points”, for short and for long times, and
plot the matching factor t∗

SS as a function of the SLSP fugacity, z.

Figure 9a demonstrates how the timescale mapping varies for diﬀerent SLSP fugacities z, depending on
the property, for which the mapping is constructed. For the already discussed mapping of P at diﬀerent
match points, tm, this gives rise to diﬀerent shapes of P (t) (because z is a function of tm). If the shape were
optimally reproduced by the SLSP model the time mapping factor t∗
SS would be independent of tm. This
strategy identiﬁes the optimal combination of z and t∗
SS = 0.0132 µs/τ . There exists
an alternate approach to identify the timescale via the long-time diﬀusion, quantiﬁed by the MSD. This
strategy has been discussed earlier for the mapping between the atomistic model and the mCG model and
also provides a relation t∗
SS(z) that is presented in Figure 9a. Gratifyingly, this curve passes through the
optimal combination identiﬁed by matching P (t), indicating that we have obtained a consistent timescale
mapping for multiple, single-chain properties.

SS, i. e., z ≈ 0.0228 and t∗

This optimal fugacity, z ≈ 0.0228, corresponds to roughly nss/n ≈ 6.3 SLSP per chain (see Figure 9b that
depicts a linear dependence of nss on z, verifying our SLSP simulation code). Each anchor of an SLSP poses
a topological constraint for the polymer motion. Although, there is no one-to-one correspondence between
the SLSP constraints and entanglements, 18,29,30 the number of SLSP constraints ≈ 12.6 is in the same order
of magnitude as the number of entanglements expected for a 400-mer cPB polymer. For cPB at T = 298 K,
Me ≈ 2900 g mol−1 has been reported for the molecular weight of a chain portion between entanglements. 54
Based on this value of Me, 400-mer chains (M = 21.6 kg mol−1) have around 7.5 entanglements per chain.
Due to the limited number of experimental data for pure cPB, we also compare to the experimental value
Me ≈ 1800 g mol−1 for 1,4-PB (mainly containing cis and trans bonds) at 413 K; 69 based on this estimate, a

16

(a) Time mapping factor t∗
SS obtained via diﬀerent
procedures as a function of the fugacity z. The z
where all methods agree, determines the optimum.

(b) Number of SLSPs as a function the SLSP fugacity
z. For the optimum z = 0.0228, we have nss/n ≈ 6.3.
The linear prediction of Ref. 18 is replicated.

Figure 9: Timescale mapping t∗
SS for the SLSP model obtained via matching diﬀerent properties. The
end-to-end vector correlation, P (t), oﬀers two diﬀerent times ”match points” (see Figure 8) and the long-time
diﬀusion allows for a timescale mapping as well.

400-mer chain has around 12 entanglements.

Figure 10 compares the MSD of the SLSP model for diﬀerent fugacities z to the results of the mCG
model, using the aforementioned long-time MSD to match the timescales. We observe the power laws that
are the hallmark of entangled dynamics for systems with large z, already for the small contour discretization,
Ncg = 32. Plotting g1(t)/

t, we highlight exponents smaller than 1/2.

√

The comparison between the mCG results and the data of the SLSP model, however, reveals deviations
on short timescales. Speciﬁcally, the SLSP model exhibits a larger MSD at times shorter than t (cid:46) O(µs),
corresponding to the length scale of a bead of the SLSP model or the tube diameter, i. e., g1(1µs) ≈ 3.56σ2. 1
We observe non-negligible deviations between the MSD of mCG and the SLSP model for time scales
below t > 10µs whereas the the relaxation modulus G(t) and the end-to-end relaxation P (t) already agrees
for t > 1µs. The diﬀerence between the observable is that the monomer MSD (g1) is sensitive to the motion
of individual beads or segments, while for the G(t) and P (t) characteristics of the orientation of the chain as
a whole are more relevant. It is natural to expect that the more coarse-grained models can represent the
large molecule scales more accurately. This is a reason why we selected the end-to-end distance correlation
P (t) to match time scales and entanglement density. This relation of accuracy discrepancy is not unique
to the model transition from mCG to SLSP, we observe similar characteristics for the transition between
the atomistic and mCG model. The mCG model provides a faithful description of the MSD for t > 0.2ns,
whereas G(t) agrees with the atomistic model already for t > 0.01ns (Figure 4).

We note that smaller fugacities, z ≤ 0.1, appear to agree somewhat better on short timescales. Such small
values of z, however, are not consistent with the dynamics of the end-to-end vector. We hypothesize that
(i) the ﬂuid-like packing structure and the more complex bonded interactions of monomeric repeating units
in the mCG model aﬀect this short-scale dynamics and (ii) the constraining tube formed by the SLSP may
be somewhat softer compared to the eﬀect of true non-crossability. This comparison identiﬁes the smallest
timescale, above which our SLSP model for cPB can provide accurate predictions. The dynamical properties
on shorter scales can be covered by more detailed models.

1The crossing of the data sets for very short times, t ≈ 10−2µs, stems from (i) the small number of Rouse modes in the SLSP
model and (ii) the deferred crossover between the ballistic and overdamped dynamics in the SLSP model where the segmental
friction does not only depend on the interactions but additionally on the strength of the DPD thermostat.

17

0.000.010.020.030.040.050.06z106105104t*SS [ns/]Re autocorrelation (long)Re autocorrelation (short)long time MSD diffusionbest z0.000.010.020.030.04z024681012nss/ndatalinear fit(a) Monomer MSD g1 shows power-law behavior char-
acteristic of entangled dynamics for diﬀerent SLSP
fugacities z and identiﬁes the shortest timescale, when
the SLSP model coincides with the mCG model.

(b) Monomer g1 and center of mass g3 MSD with the
optimal SLSP fugacity z = 0.0228 compared to the
data of the mCG model.

Figure 10: Comparison of MSD of the mCG and SLSP models.

4.2 Rheological properties

Having identiﬁed the parameters and scales of the SLSP model by comparing the single-chain statics and
dynamics to the mCG model, we can now investigate the collective, rheological properties to validate our
model.

The autocorrelation of the non-diagonal elements of the stress tensor (shear stress relaxation modulus,
G(t)) is of particular interest to many applications related to the rheology of polymer systems. For the
SLSP the bonded and non-bonded stress is calculated for each chain. To assign the stresses to individual
chains, ﬁrst, all virials of conservative forces are attributed to individual particles. In our calculation, we
ignore the force contribution from the DPD thermostat. The virial of an interacting pair is equally assigned
to the involved particles. In a second step, the particle virials are summed up in each polymer chain. For
more details on this chain average technique and its implication for the stress autocorrelation G(t), refer to
appendix A.

For a comparison between the models, we adjust them to match the shear modulus, G0, because of the
softness of the interactions in the SLSP model. To this end, we select a match point and vertically shift the
curves on a logarithmic scale.

Data are shown in Figure 11. We observe reasonable agreement between the mCG and the SLSP model
for the previously determined entanglement density z = 0.0228. In particular, this agreement extends to the
terminal decay time of G(t), validating our timescale matching. Note, however, that even with advanced
averaging methods such as the multiple-tau-correlator algorithm 52 G(t) is plagued by rather high uncertainty.
Only at shorter times, the curves slightly deviate. This is, however, expected because the mCG model
includes local dynamical modes that are integrated out in the SLSP model. The shortest timescale, on which
agreement is expected, is on the order of µs and the observed deviations are on shorter timescales.

4.3 Transferability of slip-spring model parameters

The idea of the hierarchical (consecutive) systematic coarse-graining is to be able to predict quantitatively
material properties, of high molecular weight, entangled, systems, with the highest CG model because of its
computational eﬃciency. For this goal, it is important to achieve the transferability of the obtained matching
parameters to other molecular weights. In the previous section, we demonstrated how we can obtain the
matching parameters between the mCG model and the SLSP. Before moving on to higher molecular weights
we demonstrate this transferability by simulations of 200-mer melt because it is still tractable by both, the
mCG model and the SLSP model.

Figure 12 presents the three most characteristic properties that we have used to quantify the dynamics of
polymer materials: the end-to-end vector correlation P (t), the MSD, and the stress autocorrelation function

18

Figure 11: Stress-autocorrelation of the non-diagonal stress tensor elements G(t) obtained by the mCG model
and the SLSP model for the optimal SLSP fugacity. A vertical shift (on the logarithmic scale) is performed
to match the the shear modulus G0 of the mCG and SLSP models. For comparison, we also provide the total
stress result with less statistics. We also include a stress autocorrelation calculated from the total stress, but
post processed with the multiple-tau-correlator 52 as the mCG data is generated with this algorithm as well.

(a) End-to-end vector correlation,
c.f. Figure 8

(b) Monomer g1 and center of mass
g3 MSD, c.f. Figure 10.

(c) Stress auto-correlation G(t), c.f.
Figure 11.

Figure 12: Transferability between the mCG and SLSP model. The matching parameters are obtained with
400-mer cPB and transferred to simulations of a 200-mer melt without additional adjustments. This test
demonstrates good agreement between the models with molecular weights other than the reference 400mer.
It even shows that the time and length scales at which we can expect accurate predictions are independent of
the molecular weight.

19

G(t) for the 200-mer systems. Note, that as mentioned above all model parameters have been obtained from
the 400-mer melt. Thus, the calculation of the data for the 200-mer melt in Figure 12 serves as a direct
check of the transferability of the SLSP model parametrization, with no additional adjustment. Overall, the
agreement is very good, in particular for the P (t) and the MSD. For the stress autocorrelation function,
G(t), the overlap of the two curves does not cover a large time interval. The simulations of the 400-mer
melt indicate that the SLSP model only applies for t > 1µs, independent from the molecular weight. On
this timescale, however, G(t) cannot be obtained with high accuracy in the simulation of the mCG model.
Within rather large uncertainties, the data suggest that the time of the terminal decay is correctly predicted
by the SLSP model.

Taken together, the comparison of the mCG and SLSP models for melts of 200-mer and 400mer cPB
shows the SLSP model can accurately predict a long and signiﬁcant portion of G(t) for higher molecular
weights because the relevant timescale increases with molecular weight.

5 Dynamics of PB melts

In this section, the dynamical and rheological properties of cPB melts are discussed, using the simulation
results from the atomistic, mCG, and SLSP models. Dynamical properties are presented for diﬀerent chain
lengths from oligomers up to the molecular weights of industrial relevance (100 kDa), predicted by the
diﬀerent models.

5.1 Translational dynamics

5.1.1 Self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient

Figure 13: Molecular-weight dependence of the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient for bulk melts of cPB at 413 K.
Depending on molecular weight, the results of the atomistic, mCG, or SLSP models are reported (for M = 10.8
and 21.6 kg mol−1 the results of both mCG and SLSP models are shown). The experimental self-diﬀusion
coeﬃcients for samples of 1,4 rich PB with narrow molecular-weight distributions are also shown. 70

The self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient, D, can be calculated from the linear part of the MSD of chain center-of-mass,
g3(t), through the Einstein relation, D = lim
. The molecular-weight dependence of D for cPB at 413 K
t→∞
is presented in Figure 13. Depending on the molecular weight, M , results from the atomistic, mCG, or SLSP
models are presented. For the 200-mer and 400-mer chains (M = 10.8 and 21.6 kg mol−1), the results of both
mCG and SLSP simulations are shown. The experimental values of D, 70 calculated through ﬁeld-cycling
1H NMR relaxometry, for a series of nearly monodisperse 1,4 rich PB at 413 K are also shown in Figure 13.

g3(t)
6t

20

103104105M (g mol−1)10-410-310-210-1100101102D (10−7cm2 s−1)D∝M−1.7D∝M−2.5atomisticmCGSLSPexp. data (1,4 rich PB)Considering the presence of trans segments, which are slower than cis ones, 44 in the experimental samples, a
fair agreement between simulation and experimental results is observed.

Two diﬀerent scaling regimes are observed for D, corresponding to the unentangled and the entangled
regimes. The gradual crossover between these two regimes takes place around chain lengths of 50 to 80
monomeric repeating units (Mc ≈ 2.7 to 4.3 kg mol−1). The Rouse and the tube models predict D ∝ M −1
and D ∝ M −2 scaling relations for unentangled and entangled chains, respectively. 51,67 Here the scaling
exponents of the unentangled and entangled regimes are not exactly equal to the predictions of the Rouse
and the tube models. These deviations are the results of the chain-end eﬀect (which lead to a change of
density with chain length) 71,72 and contour length ﬂuctuations and constraint release for (mildly) entangled
chains. 10,73 Similar deviations have been observed for other polymer melts as well. 10,36,37,73 The calculated
scaling exponent in the entangled regime of cPB at 413 K (around 2.5) is in good agreement with the
experimental scaling exponent for hydrogenated PB at 413 K (around 2.45). 74

The key result from comparing the chain diﬀusion properties, derived from the three models is the seamless
transition between the models as higher molecular weights are considered. Without the three coarse-graining
steps, it is intractable to perform these simulations and predict the long-time diﬀusion characteristics. The fact
that the SLSP model can seamlessly continue the scaling, highlights its ability to capture the entanglement
eﬀects correctly. The SLSP model includes contour-length ﬂuctuation and constraint-release eﬀects and,
indeed, shows very similar scaling as the experimental results. The matching between the models allows us to
use the SLSP model not only for qualitative but also for quantitative predictions.

5.1.2 Segmental mean-squared displacement

Figure 14: Segmental mean-squared displacement, g1(t), normalized by
t for cPB chains of diﬀerent lengths,
obtained by simulations of: (a) the atomistic (dots), and mCG (lines) models and (b) the SLSP simulations.
For a direct comparison between the MSD of the mCG and SLSP models see Figure 10b and Figure 12b.

√

The gradual crossover from unentangled to entangled polymer dynamics regime can also be observed
through the calculation of the segmental MSD, g1(t), as a function of chain length. The Rouse model predicts
the following scaling regimes for unentangled polymer chains (in the limit of very long chains): 75

g1(t) ∝

(cid:40)

2

t 1
t1

t < τR
t > τR

In the case of entangled chains, the tube model predicts: 51

g1(t) ∝





4

2

t 1
t 1
t 1
t1

2

t < τe
τe < t < τR
τR < t < τd
t > τd

21

(18)

(19)

10-610-510-410-310-210-1100101102t (µs)101102g1(t)/t0.5 (nm2µs−0.5)t−0.25t0.5(a)30-mer50-mer80-mer100-mer200-mer400-mer1000-mer100101102103t (µs)101102g1(t)/t0.5 (nm2µs−0.5)t−0.25t0.5(b)400-mer600-mer800-mer1000-mer2000-merwhere τe, τR, and τd are the entanglement time, the Rouse time and the reptation (disentanglement) time,
respectively. The deviations from the Rouse behavior become more clear if g1(t) is normalized by t 1
2 , which
is the expected asymptotic Rouse slope. In this presentation, a negative slope at intermediate times is a sign
of entanglements. 52 The plot of g1(t)
for cPB chains of various molecular weights is presented in Figure 14.
√
t

In panel (a) the results of atomistic, mCG,and SLSP models are displayed. g1(t)
t

of 50-mer and shorter
chains do not have a negative slope. However, before the normal diﬀusion regime, g1(t) evolves faster than t 1
2
(asymptotic Rouse behaviour). The deviation is more pronounced for shorter chains. The Rouse model for
short chains (i. e., a ﬁnite number of modes) predicts this observed behavior. In Figure 22 (subsection A.2),
the g1(t) curves of unentangled atomistic and mCG chains are compared with the predictions of the Rouse
model. For 10-mer cPB, the Rouse model describes the g1(t) of atomistic and mCG models; particularly, for
mCG chains, the agreement is very good and the Rouse model nicely ﬁt the g1(t) curve for times larger than
the short time ballistic regime. For 30-mer and 50-mer chains, a deviation between the simulation results and
the Rouse model is observed. The ignorance of non-crossability of chains in the Roue model is the probable
origin of this deviation (for a more detailed discussion see subsection A.2).

√

For 80-mer and longer chains, an interval of negative slope is observed in the plot of g1(t)
t

. The negative
slope shows the eﬀect of entanglement constraints on the motion of monomers. With increasing chain length,
the negative slope decreases and tends to the prediction of the tube model, i. e., −0.25. The deviations from
the prediction of the tube model are due to the rather short lengths of the studied chains that belong to the
region of the gradual crossover from the unentangled to the entangled regime. It is worth mentioning that
the onset of the appearance of the negative slope in g1(t) coincides with the breaking point in the slope of
D vs. N , both occur around 50 to 80 monomers. g1(t) of both atomistic and mCG models exhibit similar
behavior (similar slopes) in the region of transition from the unentangled to the entangled regime (consider
that scaling of mCG time does not aﬀect the scaling exponents of g1(t)). This similarity originates from the
preservation of the chemical identity of the atomistic model in the mCG one.

√

√

In Figure 14b results about g1(t)
t

from the SLSP simulations are presented. The SLSP model signiﬁcantly
extends the range of molecular weights and times that can be investigated. Utilizing the SLSP model enables
us to verify the prediction that higher molecular weights show a more pronounced 1/4 scaling of g1(t) at
early-intermediate times. We can also observe the transition to the scaling behavior, g1(t) ∝ t1/2, at later
intermediate times and molecular weights up to a 1000-mer. The last transition into free diﬀusion, g1(t) ∝ t,
is still a computational challenge for high molecular weights. The present data only reach this regime for less
than 600 monomeric repeating units per chain.

5.2 Linear viscoelastic properties

The typical measure for the study of the linear viscoelastic properties of polymers is the stress relaxation
modulus, G(t). The G(t) curves, calculated from the mCG and SLSP models of cPB chains with various
lengths are provided in Figure 15. Figure 15a and Figure 15b present the results of the mCG and SLSP
model, respectively. Both the Rouse and the tube models predict a decay of G(t) with the slope of t−0.5 at
short times (t < τR and t < τe for unentangled and entangled chains, respectively) and exponential decay of
G(t) at long times (t > τR and t > τd for unentangled and entangled chains). 51,67 However, the tube model
predicts a plateau for G(t) at intermediate times which is not predicted by the Rouse model. 51,67 It is clear
from Figure 15a that all G(t) curves decay with the slope of t−0.5 at short times; at intermediate times, with
increasing chain length, convergence to the expected behavior (plateau of G(t)) is observed.

Due to the high degree of coarse-graining, the SLSP model cannot resolve the behavior at short time
scales, t < 1 µs. Therefore we present in Figure 15b the stress relaxation modulus only for longer times; the
short-time decay G(t) ∝ t−1/2 is omitted. The SLSP model, however, enables us to unlock the long timescales
that are necessary to predict rheological properties of higher molecular weights. We can access chain lengths
up to 2000-mer (M = 108 kg mol−1). Even for the highest molecular weight, the 2000-mer cPB, we do not
observe a plateau in G(t), as it is expected in the limit of inﬁnite molecular weight according to the tube
model. Instead, we observe a slight, but continuous decay of G(t) that highlights the liquid properties of the
material on all timescales. This eﬀect can be partially rationalized by contour-length ﬂuctuations of the tube.

22

Figure 15: Chain-length dependence of shear-stress relaxation modulus, G(t), for cPB at 413 K from (a)
mCG and (b) SLSP models. In panel (a), the experimental 69 plateau modulus of 1,4-PB at 413 K is shown
by a dashed line. The G(t) curves of the SLSP model are calculated through chain averaging procedure;
however, for 400-mer chains, G(t) from the calculation of the autocorrelation of total stress is also presented.
The black solid lines are the results of ﬁtting Maxwell modes. To improve visibility, these lines are only
shown at long times. The SLSP model is not able to resolve the short time characteristics, however, the
behavior on longer timescales (> 1µs) has been veriﬁed in Figure 11.

Figure 16: Calculated (througth mCG and SLSP models) G(cid:48)(ω) and G(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) for 400-mer cPB (M = 21.6 kg
mol−1) together with the experimental data 76 for a nearly monodisperse 1,4 rich PB (Mn = 21.7 kg mol−1).
The experimental data have been horizontally and vertically shifted by the experimentally determined shift
factors. 76,77

The complex modulus of oscillatory shear, G∗(ω), can be calculated from G(t) through:

G∗(ω) = G(cid:48)(ω) + iG(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) = iω

(cid:90) ∞

0

e−iωtG(t)dt

(20)

where ω is the angular frequency, and G(cid:48)(ω) and G(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) denote the storage and loss moduli. The above
Laplace transform can be calculated by ﬁtting G(t) to a series of Maxwell modes and analytic calculation of
the integral:

n
(cid:88)

G(t) =

gie−t/λi

i=0

G(cid:48)(ω) =

n
(cid:88)

i=0

giω2λ2
i
1 + ω2λ2
i

, G(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) =

n
(cid:88)

i=0

giωλi
1 + ω2λ2
i

23

(21)

(22)

10-510-410-310-210-1100101t (µs)100101102103G(t) (bar)t−0.5(a)30-mer50-mer80-mer100-mer200-mer400-mer1000-mer100101102103t (µs)10-1100101102G(t) (bar)(b)400-mer (chain)400-mer (total)600-mer800-mer1000-mer2000-mermCG-400-mer10310410510610710810910101011ω (rad/s)10-210-1100101102103G0,G00 (bar)cisPB-400mermCG, G0mCG, G00SLSPtotal, G0SLSPtotal, G00SLSPchain,G0SLSPchain,G00exp., G0exp., G00where gi and λi are the modulus and relaxation time of the ith Maxwell mode, respectively. Note that,
we found agreement between the G(cid:48)(ω) and G(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) calculated through ﬁtting Maxwell modes on the G(t)
curves of mCG simulations with those obtained from the direct analytical transformation of G(t) using the
i-Rheo GT tool. 78 In Figure 16, the calculated (through mCG and SLSP simulation) G(cid:48)(ω) and G(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) curves
for 400-mer cPB (M = 21.6 kg mol−1) are presented together with the experimental data 76 for a nearly
monodisperse 1,4 rich PB with an almost similar molecular weight (Mn = 21.7 kg mol−1). The experimental
spectra were reported at T = 298 K; thus, here they have been horizontally and vertically shifted by the
experimentally determined 76,77 shift factors to generate the spectra at 413 K (aT = 31 and bT = 1.25 were
used for horizontal and vertical shifts, respectively). Taking into account the diﬀerent microstructures of the
simulated and experimental samples and also uncertainties of the shift factors, a good agreement between
simulation and experiment is observed.

Fitting the Maxwell modes to the SLSP model allows us to calculate the complex moduli for higher
molecular weights. The range validity of the SLSP model limits the range of frequencies that we can examine
to below 107rad/s. For higher frequencies, we can use the mCG model as described earlier. Figure 17 plots
the obtained moduli for the 400-mer up to the 2000-mer cPB. Whereas the high-frequency behavior is not
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by molecular weight, we observe that the low-frequency moduli strongly increase with
chain length and that the curves extend to lower frequencies. This behavior is expected because cPB with
higher molecular weight exhibits a more solid-like behavior at large, intermediate timescales, and the terminal
relaxation time increases with Mw.

While the exact shape of the dynamic moduli is inﬂuenced by the chain averaging (appendix A.1) and the
quality of the Maxwell model ﬁt, we can still determine the longest relaxation time by the ﬁrst crossing point
of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) as in indicated in Figure 17. Even as the G(cid:48)(cid:48) does not feature a negative slope, the crossing is a
signature of the entanglement dynamics. The Rouse model prediction from the moduli (inset of Figure 17)
does not feature a crossing point of the moduli.

Figure 17: Molecular-weight dependence of storage modulus, G(cid:48)(ω), and loss modulus, G(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω) calculated
through the SLSP model for cPB at 413 K. For clarity we split the molecular weights to two panels. The
longest relaxation time can be identiﬁed by the crossing point of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) at each molecular weight. The
validity range of the SLSP model, t > 1µs, limits our predictions to low frequencies. The quality of the
Maxwell model ﬁtting aﬀects the quality of the predicted moduli. The inset display the Rouse characteristics
for reference.

5.2.1 Zero-shear viscosity

The last part of our analysis concerns zero-shear viscosity, η0, which can be calculated from G(t) as:

The molecular-weight dependence of η0, is presented in Figure 18. Depending on chain length, the results of
atomistic, mCG, or SLSP simulations are reported; however, for 200-mer and 400-mer chains, the viscosities

η0 =

(cid:90) ∞

0

dt G(t)

(23)

24

104103102101100101 [s1]100101G0, G00 [bar]2000mer: G02000mer: G001000mer: G01000mer: G00800mer: G0800mer: G00104103102101100101 [s1]100101G0, G00 [bar]800mer: G0800mer: G00600mer: G0600mer: G00400mer: G0400mer: G00101100101102103104TR105104103102101G0/G0 G00/G0Rouse G0Rouse G00Figure 18: Molecular-weight dependence of zero-shear viscosity for a bulk melt of cPB at 413 K. Depending
of molecular weight, the results of the atomistic, mCG, and SLSP simulations are reported (for M = 10.8 and
21.6 kg mol−1 the results of both mCG and SLSP models are shown). The experimental viscosities (adjusted
to 413 K) for samples of nearly monodisperse 1,4 rich PB are also shown. 77

from both mCG and SLSP models are presented, that exhibit very good agreement. The experimental 77
values of η0 for nearly monodisperse 1,4-PB samples (less than 10% vinyl content, containing both cis
and trans carbon double bonds) are also presented; the experimental values of η0 were measured at lower
temperatures than 413 K and have been shifted to 413 K, using the reported shift factors. 77 Considering
diﬀerent microstructure of the simulated and experimental PB chains, a fair agreement between simulation
and experimental data is observed. Consistent with the data of diﬀusion coeﬃcients (see Figure 13), the
viscosities of the simulated cPB samples are lower than those of the experimental 1,4-PB samples. The latter
is understandable if we consider that the experimental data concern samples containing vinyl- and trans- PB
components, both of which have a larger glass transition temperature than cPB.

The Rouse and the tube model predict η0 ∝ M and η0 ∝ M 3 scaling relations for unentangled and
entangled chains, respectively. 51,67 As can be seen from Figure 18 for both experimental and simulation data,
deviations from the predictions of the Rouse and tube models are observed. Note that, at the entangled
regime, the simulation results still do not show a constant scaling exponent, and the exponent increases with
molecular weight. As mentioned for the data of D (Figure 13), the chain-end eﬀect in the unentangled regime
and contour length ﬂuctuations and constraint release in the entangled regime are well-known mechanisms
aﬀecting the scaling exponent. 77

5.3 Computational eﬃciency

In this section, we brieﬂy highlight why it is necessary to have the three tiers of modeling and the computational
advantage of the hierarchical multi-scale methodology, by comparing the computational cost of the three used
models. The parameter passing from the atomistic via the mCG to the SLSP model oﬀers the opportunity
to compare the computational eﬃciencies of the three particle-based models.

As a reference system, we chose 926 chains of a 400-mer cPB and calculate the estimated physical time
it takes to propagate the system for 1µs at 413 K. Such a system involves 1 481 600 CHx groups in the
united-atom model, 370 400 beads in the mCG representation and 29 632 particles in the SLSP scale. This
system size can be straightforwardly simulated by the SLSP model. However, it is diﬃcult to simulate such
system sizes with the mCG model and it is out of the scope of atomistic simulations. Therefore we have
extrapolated the required times from systems of smaller size for these two models.

The SLSP model is implemented for HOOMD-blue, which is optimized for the execution of Nvidia graphics
processing units (GPUs). To simulate the described benchmark we require approximately 590 s of computing
time on an Nvidia V100 GPU. The mCG and atomistic simulations are executed on CPUs. Running with
500 particles per core, the mCG simulation of the above-mentioned system takes around 10 hours on 740
cores (Intel Xeon Gold 6148 @ 2.4 GHz) and the atomistic simulation takes around 10 days on 2960 cores.

25

103104105M (g mol−1)10-410-310-210-1100101102103104η0 (Pa s)M1M3atomisticmCGSLSPexp. data (1,4-PB)model:
simulation time
particles
execution time [s]
CPUs [Intel Xeon Gold 6148]
GPUs [Nvidia V100]
cost of CPUs [≈ $US]
cost of GPU [≈ $US]
power consumption CPUs [TDP W ]
power consumption GPU [max W ]

atomistic
mCG
1µs
1µs
370 400
1 481 600
≈ 864 000 ≈ 36 000

148
-
444 000
-
22 200
-

37
-
111 000
-
5 550
-

SLSP
1µs
29 632
590
-
1
-
10 000
-
300

Figure 19: Overview of the computational costs of the three diﬀerent models in comparison (at 413 K).

26

atomisticmCGSLSP103104105106degrees of freedomexecution time [s]monetary cost [$US]power consumption [W]Figure 19 summarizes important aspects of the three diﬀerent models. The united-atom simulations
involve a factor of 4 more degrees of freedom than the mCG model but require a factor of ≈ 100 more
computational resources. This additional speedup by a factor of ≈ 25 stems from its lower friction coeﬃcient
(S ≈ 5) and the larger time step permissible (5 fs). Since the atomistic and mCG models use CPUs whereas
the SLSP model employs GPUs a quantitative comparison is not straightforward. Nevertheless, we can
appreciate from the data that the speedup by a factor of 61 × 37 in seconds (1 Xeon CPUs vs V100 GPU)
from the mCG model to our SLSP model is more than the mere reduction of the number of degrees of
freedom, a factor 12.5, and the GPU-acceleration of molecular dynamics codes, roughly a factor 6.5. 2 The
additional speedup by a factor of ≈ 28 stems from the soft interactions. Note that, it is expected that the
computational eﬃciencies of the coarser models are temperature-dependent and exponentially increase with
decreasing temperature.

An alternative to set the diﬀerent architectures in perspective consists of comparing the approximate
acquisition costs or power consumption of the key components (only CPU or GPU but not the supporting
infrastructure). For instance, the models behave like 65 000 : 677 : 1 in terms of acquisition costs.

The comparison of the diﬀerent models emphasizes that atomistic models are required to account for
the chemical speciﬁcity but also indicates that they cannot access the time and length scales relevant to
the rheology of long macromolecules. Using a three-model parameter-passing strategy we can successfully
bridge from the atomistic description to our SLSP model that can investigate the rheological properties of
macromolecular materials. From Figure 13 and Figure 18 it is apparent that even a direct mapping from
atomistic to the soft, CG (SLSP) model is not yet feasible with the available computational resources; the
scales are too far apart. Thus, the mCG description is required for suﬃcient overlap. Figure 13 and Figure 18
illustrates that the mCG model covers an intermediate regime of molecular weights between the atomistic
and SLSP model.

6 Summary

We propose a systematic, mainly bottom-up, hierarchical coupling of simulation models from three diﬀerent
scales to consistently model-speciﬁc polymer melts over broad spatiotemporal scales and predict their
rheological behavior directly from the monomeric structure. As a reference system, we apply the methodology
to cis-1,4-polybutadiene (cPB) melts. We start with a validated force ﬁeld for a united-atom model. With a
standard structural-based method (here iterative Boltzmann inversion), we can transfer the static properties
of the united cis-1,4-polybutadiene (cPB) to a moderately CG (mCG) model. To match mCG and atomistic
dynamics, the mCG time is scaled by a proper time scaling factor, t∗
mCG, which compensates for the lower
monomeric friction coeﬃcient of the mCG model than that of the atomistic model. t∗
mCG is chain length and
temperature-dependent; its chain length dependence is in phase with the chain-length dependence of melt
density and both, t∗
mCG and density, tend to constant values for suﬃciently long chains.

For the third (mesoscopic) layer of the polymer models, we use the slip-spring (SLSP) model. The
transferred static properties from mCG model to SLSP model are at long length scales; so, in the SLSP
model, the chain conﬁgurations can be considered as a Gaussian chain, simplifying the handover of static
parameters from the moderately CG to the SLSP model. However, because the SLSP model serves at a
high degree of coarse-graining, the nonbonded interactions are soft and do not prevent backbone crossing.
Therefore, without additional SLSPs, the model would not be able to capture the correct entangled dynamics.
Hence, we have two kinetic parameters to pass from the moderately CG model to the SLSP model.
i) a
timescale mapping, and ii) the number of entanglements, which are represented via SLSPs in the latter model.
We ﬁnd that the end-to-end vector correlation, P (t), allows a good mapping of both parameters. We could
verify the mapping with a comparison of the single-chain MSD and the collective stress-relaxation modulus,
G(t). The mappings are transferable to higher molecular weights, which enables us to not only access longer
time and length scales with the coarse-grained models, it also allows us to explore industrially relevant high
molecular weights. A summary of the parameterization steps for the mCG and SLSP models are provided in
Figure 20.

Finally, we verify our simulation results by measuring rheological properties such as diﬀusion and viscosity

2From https://developer.nvidia.com/hpc-application-performance we estimate that 13 Dual Xeon Gold 6240@2.60GHz

correspond to 4 V100-GPUs for GROMACS or LAMMPS.

27

Figure 20: Summary of the parameterization steps for the mCG and SLSP models. The mCG potentials
are derived by matching bulk density and local structural distribution of the mCG chains to those of the
atomistic chains. To match mCG and atomistic dynamics, the mCG time is scaled by a proper time scaling
factor, t∗
mCG, which is calculated by comparing MSD and P (t) (orientational autocorrelation function of the
end-to-end vector) of the two models. With increasing chain length, t∗
mCG tends to a constant value. At
the SLSP level, the calibration of the length unit and the determination of the shape of the bond length
distribution are performed based on the end-to-end distance and bond length distribution of the mCG chain.
The number of slip-springs and the time unit is set based on the end-to-end vector correlation, P (t), of the
more detailed model. Finally, stress relaxation modulus at t = 0, G0, is determined based on the short time
behavior of G(t) of the lower-level model.

as a function of molecular weight. We could verify our results against selected experimental results as well as
the predicted power-law scalings of these properties.

Overall, we construct three levels of modeling cis-1,4-polybutadiene (cPB). By matching static and kinetic
parameters between the models we can make quantitative predictions from the level of individual atoms (1
˚A) up to high molecular weight macromolecules (100 nm), and explore timescale from picoseconds up to
several hundred microseconds.

7 Acknowledgments

The work was supported by computational time granted from the Greek Research & Technology Network
(GRNET) in the National HPC facility ARIS under a project named POL-COMP-TIRE. V.H. acknowledges
support by project “SimEA”, funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under Grant Agreement No. 810660. This work is supported by the Goodyear Tire and Rubber
Company.

A Appendix

A.1 Stress autocorrelation in SLSP model

An accurate calculation of G(t) is challenging because of the high noise in the virial tensor. For the SLSP
model, we attack this problem by calculating the stress for the polymer chains individually and average the
results of these single-chain stresses.

All forces in the model are pairwise forces, hence the virial is calculated overall interacting particle pairs.
This includes all bonded and nonbonded interactions. For each pair, the stress is equally distributed to both
participating particles. Summing up all contributions in a molecule results in the individual chain stresses.
This allows for better statistics because the result of each chain can be averaged. We note that the summation
of all chain stresses results in the same as the total stress, however, the autocorrelation is not the same, as

28

Radial pairdistributionfunction (RDF) atthe mCG levelBond length, angle, and dihedraldistributions at the mCG levelDensitymCG potentialsMSD, P(t) (mean-squared displacement,  end-to-end vector autocorrelation)Time scaling factorBond lengthdistribution at theSLSP levelEnd-to-enddistanceSLSP length unit, SLSP bond potentialP(t) (end-to-end vectorautocorrelation)SLSP time unit, number of slip-springsG(t)(stress relaxationmodulus)G0AtomisticmCGSLSP(a) G(t) calculated per chain and in the total system.

(b) Dynamic moduli of both G(t) option in comparison.

Figure 21: Comparison of the G(t) calculated as chain average versus the calculation via the total stress with
a 800mer chain. The chain average oﬀers the better statistics, but has a slightly softer decay. The important
longest relaxation time is captured correctly with both models.

interchain correlations are sacriﬁced for noise reduction.

The standard method, employed for the atomistic and mCG model simulations, is the calculation of the

total stress in the system and its autocorrelation.

Figure 21 compares the two methods. The chain-averaging strategy oﬀers signiﬁcantly better statistics,
which results in better ﬁts for the Maxwell model. The decay of G(t), however, is softer than that obtained
by the total stress correlation. There is no pronounced plateau of G(t), obtained via the chain-averaging
method. As a consequence, the loss modulus for the considered chain lengths does not feature the negative
slope after the ﬁrst maximum. Both, a plateau of G(t) and a negative slope of G(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω), are considered key
signatures of reptation dynamics of entangled chains. We note that this observation is not a shortcoming
of the underlying SLSP model but rather of the measurement of the stress autocorrelation G(t). The total
stress autocorrelation captures these eﬀects in our simulations.

For this manuscript, we opt for the higher precision of the chain-averaging method. We focus on the
important longest relaxation time, which is captured in both scenarios but is more easily identiﬁed with
better statistics. The longest relaxation time of an entangled polymer melt can be identiﬁed as the lowest
frequency where the dynamic moduli G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) cross each other as marked in Figure 21b.

A.2 Segmental mean-squared displacement of unentangled chains

In this section, we compare the segmental mean-squared displacements, g1(t), of unentangled cPB chains
with the predictions of the Rouse model for the g1(t) of short chains (i. e., few Rouse modes): 75

g1(t)
R2
ee

=

2
π2

(cid:34)

t
τR

+

NR−1
(cid:88)

p=1

(cid:16)

1
p2

1 − e−p2t/τR

(cid:35)

(cid:17)

(24)

here NR is number of Rouse segments of the chain, τR is the Rouse time, and R2
ee is the end-to-end distance.
Equation 24 predicts three scaling regimes for g1(t): at short times, g1(t) ∝ t; at intermediate times g1(t) ∝ tx,
where 0.5 ≤ x ≤ 1 depending on NR (for large values of NR, x = 0.5); ﬁnally, at long times g1(t) ∝ t (normal
diﬀusion regime). For using Equation 24, we calculate τR from diﬀusion coeﬃcient, D, through: 75

τR =

R2
ee
3π2D

(25)

The only free parameter for ﬁtting is NR, the number of Rouse segments. To determine NR we ﬁtted
Equation 24 to the g1(t) of 10-mer chains and determined NR for them; for other chain lengths, the NR
values were calculated from the NR of 10-mer chains (NR is proportional to chain length).

29

103102101100101102103t [s]103102101100101102G(t) [bar]chain dataMW chain fittotal dataMW total fit103102101100101 [s1]100101G0, G00 [bar]chain G0chain G00total G0total G00Figure 22: Mean-squared displacement of monomers, g1(t), normalized by t0.5 for (a) 10-mer, (b) 30-mer,
and (c) 50-mer cPB chains from atomistic and mCG simulations. The predicted g1(t) curves of the Rouse
model for chains containing ﬁnite number of segments, NR, are included; in all cases, one Rouse segment
corresponds to around 2.5 monomeric repeating units (≈ one Kuhn segment).

Figure 22a shows the g1(t) of 10-mer atomistic and mCG chains together with the prediction of the Rouse
model with NR = 4. This NR value is in agreement with the number of Kuhn segments per a 10-mer chain.
One Kuhn segment of the model cPB chains contains around 9 backbone bonds; 44 therefore, a 10-mer cPB
chain (containing 39 backbone bonds) contains around 4 Kuhn segments. After the very short time ballistic
regime (in which g1(t) ∝ t2), g1(t) of 10-mer mCG chains exhibit a perfect match with the result of the
Rouse model. After the ballistic regime, g1(t) of mCG model shows a distinct g1(t) ∝ t1 regime, which is
in agreement with the Rouse model; such a short time linear regime is not clearly seen in the g1(t) of the

30

10-410-310-210-1100101102t (ns)10-1100101g1(t)/R2ee/t0.5 (ns−0.5)(a)g1(t)∝t0.7g1(t)∝t1g1(t)∝t2cPB 10-meratomisticmCGRouse model, NR=410-310-210-1100101102t (ns)10-210-1100g1(t)/R2ee/t0.5 (ns−0.5)(b)g1(t)∝t0.6cPB 30-meratomisticmCGRouse model, NR=1210-310-210-1100101102103t (ns)10-210-1100g1(t)/R2ee/t0.5 (ns−0.5)(c)g1(t)∝t0.54cPB 50-meratomisticmCGRouse model, NR=20atomistic chains. However, the Rouse model well describes the subdiﬀusive regime of the g1(t) of 10-mer
atomistic chain.

Figure 22b-c shows the g1(t) of 30-mer and 50-mer atomistic and mCG chains together with the predictions
of the Rouse model with NR = 12 and 20, respectively. Here, as in the case of 10-mer chains, one Rouse
segment corresponds to approximately one Kuhn segment. For 30-mer and 50-mer chains the agreement
between the simulation results and the Rouse model is not as good as for 10-mer cPB. Particularly, for
these cases, the Rouse model overestimates the slope of g1(t) at the intermediate subdiﬀusive regime (the
eﬀect is more pronounced for 50-mer cPB). The probable origin of this behavior is the ignorance of the
non-crossability of chains in the Rouse model. The eﬀect of non-crossability is higher for longer chains and
ﬁnally leads to the appearance of entangled dynamics (as discussed in the main manuscript, for cPB, the
signs of the entangled dynamics emerge around chain lengths of 50–80 monomers).

References

[1] Tsch¨op, W.; Kremer, K.; Batoulis, J.; B¨urger, T.; Hahn, O. Simulation of polymer melts. I. Coarse-

graining procedure for polycarbonates. Acta Polym. 1998, 49, 61–74.

[2] Theodorou, D. N. Hierarchical modelling of polymeric materials. Chem. Een. Sci. 2007, 62, 5697–5714.

[3] Padding, J.; Briels, W. J. Systematic coarse-graining of the dynamics of entangled polymer melts: the

road from chemistry to rheology. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2011, 23, 233101.

[4] Harmandaris, V.; Adhikari, N.; van der Vegt, N. F.; Kremer, K. Hierarchical modeling of polystyrene:

From atomistic to coarse-grained simulations. Macromolecules 2006, 39, 6708–6719.

[5] Sukumaran, S. K.; Likhtman, A. E. Modeling entangled dynamics: comparison between stochastic

single-chain and multichain models. Macromolecules 2009, 42, 4300–4309.

[6] M¨uller, M. Studying Amphiphilic Self-assembly with Soft Coarse-Grained Models. J. Stat. Phys. 2011,

145, 967–1016.

[7] Kremer, K.; Grest, G. S. Dynamics of entangled linear polymer melts: A molecular-dynamics simulation.

J. Chem. Phys. 1990, 92, 5057–5086.

[8] Tsch¨op, W.; Kremer, K.; Hahn, O.; Batoulis, J.; B¨urger, T. Simulation of polymer melts. II. From

coarse-grained models back to atomistic description. Acta Polym. 1998, 49, 75–79.

[9] Reith, D.; P¨utz, M.; M¨uller-Plathe, F. Deriving eﬀective mesoscale potentials from atomistic simulations.

J. Comput. Chem. 2003, 24, 1624–1636.

[10] Harmandaris, V.; Kremer, K. Dynamics of polystyrene melts through hierarchical multiscale simulations.

Macromolecules 2009, 42, 791–802.

[11] Fritz, D.; Harmandaris, V. A.; Kremer, K.; van der Vegt, N. F. Coarse-grained polymer melts based on
isolated atomistic chains: Simulation of polystyrene of diﬀerent tacticities. Macromolecules 2009, 42,
7579–7588.

[12] Ohkuma, T.; Kremer, K. Comparison of two coarse-grained models of cis-polyisoprene with and without

pressure correction. Polymer 2017, 130, 88–101.

[13] Kempfer, K.; Dev´emy, J.; Dequidt, A.; Couty, M.; Malfreyt, P. Realistic coarse-grain model of cis-1,

4-polybutadiene: from chemistry to rheology. Macromolecules 2019, 52, 2736–2747.

[14] Shahidi, N.; Chazirakis, A.; Harmandaris, V.; Doxastakis, M. Coarse-graining of polyisoprene melts

using inverse Monte Carlo and local density potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 152, 124902.

[15] Eslami, H.; Karimi-Varzaneh, H. A.; M¨uller-Plathe, F. Coarse-grained computer simulation of nanocon-

ﬁned polyamide-6, 6. Macromolecules 2011, 44, 3117–3128.

31

[16] Johnston, K.; Harmandaris, V. Hierarchical multiscale modeling of polymer–solid interfaces: Atomistic
to coarse-grained description and structural and conformational properties of polystyrene–gold systems.
Macromolecules 2013, 46, 5741–5750.

[17] Pandey, Y. N.; Brayton, A.; Burkhart, C.; Papakonstantopoulos, G. J.; Doxastakis, M. Multiscale

modeling of polyisoprene on graphite. J. Chem. Phys. 2014, 140, 054908.

[18] Chappa, V.; Morse, D. C.; Zippelius, A.; M¨uller, M. Translationally Invariant Slip-Spring Model for

Entangled Polymer Dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 148302.

[19] Padding, J.; Briels, W. J. Uncrossability constraints in mesoscopic polymer melt simulations: non-Rouse

behavior of C 120 H 242. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2001, 115, 2846–2859.

[20] Hua, C. C.; Schieber, J. D. Segment connectivity, chain-length breathing, segmental stretch, and
constraint release in reptation models. I. Theory and single-step strain predictions. J. Chem. Phys. 1998,
109, 10018–10027.

[21] Hua, C. C.; Schieber, J. D.; Venerus, D. C. Segment connectivity, chain-length breathing, segmental
stretch, and constraint release in reptation models. II. Double-step strain predictions. J. Chem. Phys.
1998, 109, 10028–10032.

[22] Hua, C. C.; Schieber, J. D.; Venerus, D. C. Segment connectivity, chain-length breathing, segmental
stretch, and constraint release in reptation models. III. Shear ﬂows. J. Rheol. 1999, 43, 701–717.

[23] Masubuchi, Y.; Takimoto, J.-I.; Koyama, K.; Ianniruberto, G.; Marrucci, G.; Greco, F. Brownian
simulations of a network of reptating primitive chains. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2001, 115,
4387–4394.

[24] Likhtman, A. E. Single-chain slip-link model of entangled polymers: Simultaneous description of neutron

spin- echo, rheology, and diﬀusion. Macromolecules 2005, 38, 6128–6139.

[25] M¨uller, M.; Daoulas, K. Ch. Single-chain dynamics in a homogeneous melt and a lamellar microphase: A
comparison between Smart Monte Carlo dynamics, slithering-snake dynamics, and slip-link dynamics. J.
Chem. Phys. 2008, 129, 164906.

[26] Del Biondo, D.; Masnada, E. M.; Merabia, S.; Couty, M.; Barrat, J.-L. Numerical study of a slip-link

model for polymer melts and nanocomposites. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 138, 194902.

[27] Schieber, J. D.; Andreev, M. Entangled polymer dynamics in equilibrium and ﬂow modeled through slip

links. Annual review of chemical and biomolecular engineering 2014, 5, 367–381.

[28] Uneyama, T.; Masubuchi, Y. Multi-chain slip-spring model for entangled polymer dynamics. The Journal

of chemical physics 2012, 137, 154902.

[29] Ramirez-Hernandez, A.; Peters, B. L.; Schneider, L.; Andreev, M.; Schieber, J. D.; M¨uller, M.; Kr¨oger, M.;
de Pablo, J. J. A detailed examination of the topological constraints of lamellae-forming block copolymers.
Macromolecules 2018, 51, 2110–2124.

[30] Ramirez-Hernandez, A.; Peters, B. L.; Schneider, L.; Andreev, M.; Schieber, J. D.; M¨uller, M.;
de Pablo, J. J. A multi-chain polymer slip-spring model with ﬂuctuating number of entanglements:
Density ﬂuctuations, conﬁnement, and phase separation. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2017, 146,
014903.

[31] Masubuchi, Y. Simulating the Flow of Entangled Polymers. Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular

Engineering 2014, 5, 11–33, PMID: 24498953.

[32] Masubuchi, Y.; Uneyama, T. Comparison among multi-chain models for entangled polymer dynamics.

Soft Matter 2018, 14, 5986–5994.

32

[33] Masubuchi, Y. Multichain slip-spring simulations for branch polymers. Macromolecules 2018, 51,

10184–10193.

[34] Langeloth, M.; Masubuchi, Y.; B¨ohm, M. C.; M¨uller-Plathe, F. Recovering the reptation dynamics of
polymer melts in dissipative particle dynamics simulations via slip-springs. The Journal of chemical
physics 2013, 138, 104907.

[35] Masubuchi, Y.; Langeloth, M.; B¨ohm, M. C.; Inoue, F., Tadashi M¨uller-Plathe A multichain slip-spring
dissipative particle dynamics simulation method for entangled polymer solutions. Macromolecules 2016,
49, 9186–9191.

[36] Vogiatzis, G. G.; Megariotis, G.; Theodorou, D. N. Equation of state based slip spring model for entangled

polymer dynamics. Macromolecules 2017, 50, 3004–3029.

[37] Sgouros, A.; Megariotis, G.; Theodorou, D. Slip-spring model for the linear and nonlinear viscoelastic
properties of molten polyethylene derived from atomistic simulations. Macromolecules 2017, 50, 4524–
4541.

[38] Megariotis, G.; Vogiatzis, G. G.; Sgouros, A. P.; Theodorou, D. N. Slip spring-based mesoscopic
simulations of polymer networks: Methodology and the corresponding computational code. Polymers
2018, 10, 1156.

[39] Sgouros, A.; Vogiatzis, G.; Megariotis, G.; Tzoumanekas, C.; Theodorou, D. Multiscale simulations of
graphite-capped polyethylene melts: brownian dynamics/kinetic Monte Carlo compared to atomistic
calculations and experiment. Macromolecules 2019, 52, 7503–7523.

[40] Becerra, D.; C´ordoba, A.; Katzarova, M.; Andreev, M.; Venerus, D. C.; Schieber, J. D. Polymer rheology

predictions from ﬁrst principles using the slip-link model. J. Rheol. 2020, 64, 1035–1043.

[41] Wu, Z.; Kalogirou, A.; De Nicola, A.; Milano, G.; M¨uller-Plathe, F. Atomistic hybrid particle-ﬁeld
molecular dynamics combined with slip-springs: Restoring entangled dynamics to simulations of polymer
melts. J. Comp. Chem. 2021, 42, 6–18.

[42] Smith, G. D.; Paul, W. United atom force ﬁeld for molecular dynamics simulations of 1, 4-polybutadiene
based on quantum chemistry calculations on model molecules. J. Phys. Chem. A 1998, 102, 1200–1208.

[43] Smith, G.; Paul, W.; Monkenbusch, M.; Willner, L.; Richter, D.; Qiu, X.; Ediger, M. Molecular dynamics
of a 1, 4-polybutadiene melt. Comparison of experiment and simulation. Macromolecules 1999, 32,
8857–8865.

[44] Behbahani, A. F.; Rissanou, A.; Kritikos, G.; Doxastakis, M.; Burkhart, C.; Poli´nska, P.; Harman-
daris, V. A. Conformations and Dynamics of Polymer Chains in Cis and Trans Polybutadiene/Silica
Nanocomposites through Atomistic Simulations: From the Unentangled to the Entangled Regime.
Macromolecules 2020, 53, 6173–6189.

[45] Nos´e, S. A molecular dynamics method for simulations in the canonical ensemble. Mol. Phys. 1984, 52,

255–268.

[46] Hoover, W. G. Canonical dynamics: equilibrium phase-space distributions. Phys. Rev. A 1985, 31, 1695.

[47] Parrinello, M.; Rahman, A. Polymorphic transitions in single crystals: A new molecular dynamics

method. J. Appl. Phys. 1981, 52, 7182–7190.

[48] Pronk, S.; P´all, S.; Schulz, R.; Larsson, P.; Bjelkmar, P.; Apostolov, R.; Shirts, M. R.; Smith, J. C.;
Kasson, P. M.; van der Spoel, D.; Hess, B.; Lindahl, E. GROMACS 4.5: a high-throughput and highly
parallel open source molecular simulation toolkit. Bioinformatics 2013, 29, 845–854.

[49] Wang, H.; Junghans, C.; Kremer, K. Comparative atomistic and coarse-grained study of water: What

do we lose by coarse-graining? Eur Phys J E 2009, 28, 221–229.

33

[50] Bussi, G.; Donadio, D.; Parrinello, M. Canonical sampling through velocity rescaling. The Journal of

chemical physics 2007, 126, 014101.

[51] Doi, M.; Edwards, S. The Theory of Polymer Dynamics; 1988.

[52] Likhtman, A. E.; Sukumaran, S. K.; Ramirez, J. Linear viscoelasticity from molecular dynamics simulation

of entangled polymers. Macromolecules 2007, 40, 6748–6757.

[53] Ramirez, J.; Sukumaran, S. K.; Vorselaars, B.; Likhtman, A. E. Eﬃcient on the ﬂy calculation of time

correlation functions in computer simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 133, 154103.

[54] Ferry, J. D. Viscoelastic properties of polymers; John Wiley & Sons, 1980.

[55] Harmandaris, V.; Doxastakis, M.; Mavrantzas, V.; Theodorou, D. Detailed molecular dynamics simulation
of the self-diﬀusion of n-alkane and cis-1, 4 polyisoprene oligomer melts. The Journal of chemical physics
2002, 116, 436–446.

[56] Harmandaris, V.; Kremer, K. Predicting polymer dynamics at multiple length and time scales. Soft

Matter 2009, 5, 3920–3926.

[57] Wittmer, J. P.; Meyer, H.; Baschnagel, J.; Johner, A.; Obukhov, S.; Mattioni, L.; M¨uller, M.; Se-
menov, A. N. Long Range Bond-Bond Correlations in Dense Polymer Solutions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004,
93, 147801.

[58] Klapp, S. H. L.; Diestler, D. J.; Schoen, M. Why are eﬀective potentials ‘soft’? J. Phys.: Condens.

Matter 2004, 16, 7331–7352.

[59] Anderson, J. A.; Lorenz, C. D.; Travesset, A. General Purpose Molecular Dynamics Simulations Fully
Implemented on Graphics Processing Units. Journal of Computational Physics 2008, 227, 5342 – 5359.

[60] Phillips, C. L.; Anderson, J. A.; Glotzer, S. C. Pseudo-Random Number Generation for Brownian
Dynamics and Dissipative Particle Dynamics Simulations on GPU Devices. Journal of Computational
Physics 2011, 230, 7191–7201.

[61] Glaser, J.; Nguyen, T. D.; Anderson, J. A.; Lui, P.; Spiga, F.; Millan, J. A.; Morse, D. C.; Glotzer, S. C.
Strong scaling of general-purpose molecular dynamics simulations on GPUs. Computer Physics Commu-
nications 2015, 192, 97–107.

[62] Warren, P.; Espanol, P. Statistical-mechanics of dissipative particle dynamics. EPL (Europhys. Lett.)

1995, 30, 191196.

[63] Heck, M.; Schneider, L.; M¨uller, M.; Wilhelm, M. Diblock Copolymers with Similar Glass Transition Tem-
peratures in Both Blocks for Comparing Shear Orientation Processes with DPD Computer Simulations.
Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 2018, 219, 1700559.

[64] Allen, M. P.; Tildesley, D. J. Computer Simulation of Liquids (Oxford Science Publications); Clarendon

Press: Oxford, England, UK, 1989.

[65] Matsen, M. W. The standard Gaussian model for block copolymer melts. J. Phys: Condens. Matter

2001, 14, R21.

[66] Kuhn, W.; Gr¨un, F. Beziehungen zwischen elastischen Konstanten und Dehnungsdoppelbrechung

hochelastischer Stoﬀe. Colloid & Polymer Science 1942, 101, 248–271.

[67] Rubinstein, M.; Colby, R. H. Polymer physics; Oxford university press New York, 2003; Vol. 23.

[68] Rouse, P. E. A Theory of the Linear Viscoelastic Properties of Dilute Solutions of Coiling Polymers. The

Journal of Chemical Physics 1953, 21, 1272–1280.

[69] Fetters, L.; Lohse, D.; Richter, D.; Witten, T.; Zirkel, A. Connection between polymer molecular weight,
density, chain dimensions, and melt viscoelastic properties. Macromolecules 1994, 27, 4639–4647.

34

[70] Meier, R.; Herrmann, A.; Kresse, B.; Privalov, A.; Kruk, D.; Fujara, F.; R¨ossler, E. Long-Time Diﬀusion

in Polymer Melts Revealed by 1H NMR Relaxometry. ACS Macro Letters 2013, 2, 96–99.

[71] Harmandaris, V.; Mavrantzas, V.; Theodorou, D. Atomistic molecular dynamics simulations of polydis-

perse linear polyethylene melts. Macromolecules 1998, 31, 7934–7943.

[72] Harmandaris, V.; Mavrantzas, V.; Theodorou, D.; Kr¨oger, M.; Ram´ırez, J.; ¨Ottinger, H.; Vlassopoulos, D.
Dynamic crossover from Rouse to entangled polymer melt regime: Signals from long, detailed atomistic
molecular dynamics simulations, supported by rheological experiments. Macromolecules 2003, 36,
1376–1387.

[73] Lodge, T. P. Reconciliation of the molecular weight dependence of diﬀusion and viscosity in entangled

polymers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1999, 83, 3218.

[74] Tao, H.; Lodge, T. P.; Von Meerwall, E. D. Diﬀusivity and viscosity of concentrated hydrogenated

polybutadiene solutions. Macromolecules 2000, 33, 1747–1758.

[75] Doi, M. Introduction to polymer physics; Oxford university press, 1996.

[76] Liu, C.-Y.; Halasa, A. F.; Keunings, R.; Bailly, C. Probe rheology: A simple method to test tube motion.

Macromolecules 2006, 39, 7415–7424.

[77] Colby, R. H.; Fetters, L. J.; Graessley, W. W. The melt viscosity-molecular weight relationship for linear

polymers. Macromolecules 1987, 20, 2226–2237.

[78] Tassieri, M.; Ram´ırez, J.; Karayiannis, N. C.; Sukumaran, S. K.; Masubuchi, Y. i-Rheo GT: Transforming

from time to frequency domain without artifacts. Macromolecules 2018, 51, 5055–5068.

35

