Dynamics and Rheology of Polymer Melts via Hierarchical
Atomistic, Coarse-grained, and Slip-spring Simulations

@ @
Alireza F. Behbahanil ©, Ludwig Schneider?’®, Anastassia Rissanou', Anthony Chazirakis! , Petra

Bacoval, Pritam Kumar Janal, Wei Lil, Manolis Doxastakis!, Patrycja Politiska®, Craig Burkhart,
«Lp

Marcus Miiller***, and Vagelis A. Harmandaris

{ Institute of Applied and Computational Mathematics, Foundation for Research and Technology - Hellas,
Heraklion GR-71110, Greece
{t Institute for Theoretical Physics, Georg-August University Gottingen, Germany
{ Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee
37996, USA
§ Goodyear S.A., Avenue Gordon Smith, Colmar-Berg L-7750, Luxembourg
|| The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, 142 Goodyear Blud., Akron, Ohio 44305, USA
1 Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University of Crete, Heraklion GR-71110, Greece
# Computation-based Science and Technology Research Center, The Cyprus Institute, Nicosia 2121, Cyprus

@ A. F. Behbahani and L. Schneider contributed equally to this work
* E-mail: mmueller@theorie.physik.uni-goettingen.de, harman@uoc.gr

Abstract

A hierarchical (triple scale) simulation methodology is presented for the prediction of the dynamical
and rheological properties of high molecular weight entangled polymer melts. The methodology consists
of atomistic, moderately coarse-grained (mCG), and highly coarse-grained slip-spring (SLSP) simulations.
At the mCG level, a few chemically bonded atoms are lumped into one coarse-grained bead. At this
level, the chemical identity of the underlying atomistic system, and the interchain topological constraints
(entanglements) are preserved. The mCG interaction potentials are derived by matching local structural
distributions of the mCG model to those of the atomistic model through iterative Boltzmann inversion.
For matching mCG and atomistic dynamics, the mCG time is scaled by a time scaling factor, which
compensates for the lower monomeric friction coefficient of the mCG model than that of the atomistic
one. At the SLSP level, multiple Kuhn segments of a polymer chain are represented by one coarse-grained
bead. The very soft nonbonded interactions between beads do not prevent chain crossing and, hence,
can not capture entanglements. The topological constraints are represented by slip-springs, restricting
the lateral motion of polymer chains. A compensating pair potential is used in the SLSP model, to
keep the static macromolecular properties unaltered upon the introduction of slip-springs. The static
and kinetic parameters of the SLSP model are determined based on the lower level simulation models.
Particularly, matching the orientational autocorrelation of the end-to-end vector, we determine the
number of slip-springs and calibrate the timescale of the SLSP model. As the test case, the hierarchical
methodology is applied to cis-1,4-polybutadiene (cPB) at 413 K. Dynamical single-chain and linear
viscoelastic properties of cPB melts are calculated for a broad range of molecular weights, ranging from
unentangled to well-entangled chains. The calculations are compared, and found in good agreement, with
experimental data from the literature.

2101.08985v1 [cond-mat.soft] 22 Jan 2021

arXiv

1 Introduction

Nowadays, with the progress of available computational power, molecular simulations have become a powerful
and predictive tool for the investigation of the chain dynamics and the rheology of polymer materials. However,
molecular simulations of polymer materials of industrial relevance are not straightforward because of the
extremely broad range of time and length scales involved in macromolecular chains of high molecular weights.
As an example, relevant timescales of a polymer melt extend from the periods of covalent bond vibrations

(= 10714 s) to times of entangled chain relaxation that might be of the order of seconds, even at temperatures
well above the glass transition temperature, T,. Moreover, relevant length scales of a polymer material cover
atomic sizes (10~!° m) up to the size of a polymer chain (= 10~8-10~7 m) and possibly larger length scales
that characterize the structure of hybrid multiphase systems. Therefore, a single modeling approach cannot
simultaneously address all relevant length and time scales, and it is necessary to combine simulation methods
of different spatiotemporal scales“

The natural route for increasing the lengt
grained (CG) representation of polymer chain. A CG model is commonly obtained by lumping a group of
chemically bonded atoms into one superatom (CG bead or particle) and tuning the CG model to reproduce
some target structural, dynamical, and/or thermodynamic properties of the fine-grained, more detailed,
model. A systematic parametrization of CG models includes deriving interaction potentials between CG beads
and/or calibration of the CG model parameters using data from the more detailed atomistic simulations;
such a procedure is typically called ” bottom-up coarse-graining” .

An alternative to the systematic bottom-up derivation of coarse-grained representations are top-down
CG models In these approaches, a universal representation (e. g., a bead-spring model) is adopted tha’
only incorporates the relevant interactions, such as the connectivity along the macromolecular backbone
and the segmental repulsion, limiting fluctuations of the melt density — in a computationally efficient way.
The strengths of these relevant interactions are related to experimentally measurable quantities, such as the
spatial extent of the macromolecules in a melt and the isothermal compressibility. Comparing to experimental
data or lower-scale simulations, the strength of the interactions or time and length scales are identified for a
specific material. Universal models are also widely used for studying (in a qualitative manner) the general
behavior of polymer materials.

Because of the averaging over microscopic details, CG potentials are softer than the corresponding
fine-grained potentials. However, at low or moderate degrees of coarse-graining (lumping a few atoms in a
CG bead) the interactions remain strong enough to prevent chain crossing and to preserve entanglement
constraints between polymer chains. So far, various moderately coarse-grained models, which stay close
to the microscopic structure, have been proposed in the literature for different polymers through differen
coarse-graining procedures. Typical examples include the works by Tschép et al.4I8| who introduced a
systematic coarse-graining procedure and applied it to derive CG potentials for polycarbonates. They
generated long atomistic chains, with a proper distribution of torsional angles, through Monte-Carlo (MC)
simulations and mapped them onto a CG representation by replacing groups of atoms with CG beads. The
effective bonded potentials (bond length, angle, torsion) of the CG chain were calculated from the Boltzmann
inverse of the corresponding distributions. Finally, the nonbonded interactions between CG beads were
adjusted to reproduce the correct density of the polymer. Reith et al introduced an iterative procedure,
called iterative Boltzmann inversion, for deriving effective CG potentials. They also determined nonbonded
CG interactions by matching radial distribution function (RDF) of the CG melt to that of the atomistic
melt. Harmandaris and collaborators#2#2 devised CG models for polystyrene (PS) chains and studied
the structural and dynamical properties of PS melts. Ohkuma and Kremer2l studied the properties of two
different CG models (with and without pressure correction) for cis-1,4-polyisoprene. Kempfer et al.) used
a trajectory-matching approach for coarse-graining of cis-1,4-polybutadiene (cPB). In their approach, the
parameters of the CG model were obtained by optimizing the matching between the trajectory of the CG
model, produced through DPD simulation, and the reference trajectory of the more detailed model. Recently,
Shahidi et all used an inverse Monte Carlo method for constructing local-density dependent CG potentials
for cis-1,4-polyisoprene; in addition to the conventional bonded and pair distributions, the derived CG
potentials reproduce the distribution of the nearest-neighbors of the underlying atomistic model. Moderately
CG models have also been used to study interfacial polymer systems, like polyamide/ graphene #4) PS/ gold24
and polyisoprene/ graphite! systems.

At high degrees of coarse-graining (lumping many atoms in one CG bead), which are necessary for the
simulation of high molecular weight polymers, pair interactions are very soft and they can not prevent chain
i d hence, the model fails to capture the topological constraints (entanglements) between polymer
Therefore, to preserve entanglement effects, which are key features of polymer dynamics,
additional constraints should be added to the model! To reintroduce the reptation dynamics into
highly CG models, single-chain and multi-chain slip-link2224 and slip-spring (SLSP)H828185) models have
been developed.

nd time scales accessible to simulations is to use a coarse-

